
--- Page 7 ---
Abstract 
Recent studies on the Sadiola open cast have indicated different metallogenic styles for the Sadiola gold 
deposit.  The  Sadiola  open  cast  occurs  with  the  FE3  and  FE4  open  cast  within  the  Palaeoproterozoic 
Kedougou-Kêniêba  Inlier  of  the  West  African  Craton.    The  Inlier  consists  of  Birimian  metasediments 
which  were  metamorphosed  and  deformed  during  the  2.1  –  1.9 Ga  Eburnean  orogeny.    Metamorphism 
reached  lower  greenschist  facies  as  indicated  by  the  chlorite-biotite-cordierite-calcite-dolomite  mineral 
assemblages. The Sadiola deposit is hosted by the Kofi Formation which is currently undated. The Kofi 
Formation is made up of Birimian-type sediments and they include greywacke, shale and graphitic shale 
with conglomeratic interbeds, banded iron formations and carbonates. 
The alteration types recorded in the host rocks are potassic, silicification, dolomitisation, chlorite-biotite 
alteration,  calc-silicate  and  sulphidation.  The  common  sulphide  minerals  are  pyrite,  arsenopyrite  and 
pyrrhotite  with minor  magnetite and sphalerite. The following paragenetic sequence is observed for the 
ore  mineralogy:  pyrite  –  chalcopyrite  -  (+  sphalerite)  –  arsenopyrite. Gold is  paragenetically  associated 
with pyrite and arsenopyrite. The rocks also show evidence of deformation through kinked biotite and the 
development  of stylolites. Two metamorphic events are recorded at Sadiola: regional metamorphism to 
greenschist facies and contact metamorphism to hornblende-hornfels facies.  
Sadiola deposit is therefore classified as either an intrusion-related gold deposit or a thermal aureole gold 
deposit,  which  are  all  subclasses  of  orogenic  gold  deposits.  Mineralisation  at  the  Sadiola  deposit  is 
spatially and temporally associated with the tonalite-granodiorite plutons and tonalite dykes. The Sadiola 
Fracture  Zone  served  as  the  fluid  conduit  and  mineralisation  occurs  along  the  inner  to  middle  contact 
aureole. The ubiquitous occurrence of biotite marker in polished thin sections is interpreted as indicating 
biotite isograd and marks the division between rocks that have been completely recrystallised at Sadiola 
to rocks in which the primary bedding is still preserved.  
vi

--- Page 8 ---
CHAPTER 1: Introduction 
1.1  Preamble 
The giant  Sadiola opencast gold mine is located  within  the Sadiola  goldfield in Mali  in the Kedougou-
Kéniéba Inlier (KKI), which is part of the West African Craton (WAC). The goldfield also hosts the FE3 
and  the  FE4  open  casts.  These  together  with  the  Sadiola  opencast  mine  are  mined  by  Société 
d’Exploitation  des  Mines  d’Or  de  Sadiola  S.A  (SEMOS),  which  is  a  joint  venture  between  the 
government  of  Mali,  IAMGOLD,  IFC  and  AngloGold  Ashanti.  Mining  in  the  Sadiola  opencast 
commenced in 1996 and the opencast is currently reviewing its resources and reserves. 
This research project concentrates primarily on the ore genesis of the Sadiola gold mine. Various deposit 
styles  have  been  suggested  for  the  Sadiola  deposit  in  the  sub-classes  of  an  orogenic  type  deposit 
(Goldfarb  et  al.,  2001).  Mineralisation  at  Sadiola  has  been  shown  to  have  a  temporal  and  a  spatial 
relationship to the tonalite-granodiorite plutons and tonalite dykes. Sadiola is located in close proximity to 
the  Alamoutala-Sekokoto-Kakadian  plutonic  system.  Mineralisation  has  shown  to  be  as  a  result  of  the 
fluids and metamorphism associated with the intrusions (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b). Determining the 
paragenesis,  investigation  of  the  mineralogical,  microstructural  and  alteration  events  will  assist  in 
determining  gold  mineralisation,  and  is  considered  important  for  the  Sadiola  exploration  and  in-mine 
development. 
1.2  Location and Physiography 
The  Sadiola  opencast  mine  is  located  within  the  Sadiola  village.  The  village  is  situated  in  the  south-
western part of Mali at about 77km south of the regional capital, Kayes (Fig. 1) near the border of Mali 
and  Senegal.  Mali  is  a  semitropical  to  arid  landlocked  country  which  is  part  of  the  West  African 
Savannah-Sahel  region  (Fig.  1).  It  extends  over  1,  240,  278  square  kilometres  in  size.  Its  estimated 
population was recorded at 12.5 million as at 2006 with an annual growth rate of 2.4%. French serves as 
an official language with 80% of the population  speaking Bambara. The main religion is Muslim, with 
Christian and other religions estimated at 10% of the population. 
In 2006, the country’s GDP was estimated at $5.847 billion with an annual growth rate estimated at 5.1%.  
The  country’s  GDP  puts  Mali  as  one  of  the  poorest  countries  in  the  world.  The  main  sectors  that 
contribute largely to this GDP are mining, agriculture and livestock farming and Mali is currently the 3rd 
largest  producer  of  gold  in  the  continent  after  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  and  Ghana.  Mining  is  a 
growing industry in the country and gold mining accounts for approximately 80% of the mining activity. 
Gold became the number one mining export in Mali with AngloGold Ashanti and Randgold being two of 
the biggest mining houses in the country (US Department of States). 
7

--- Page 9 ---
1.3  Aims and Objectives 
The  main  aim  of  this  project  is  to  define  the  Sadiola  deposit  style  with  a  particular  interest  in  the 
petrology, paragenesis, structure, mineralogy of the deposit and its genetic model. This will then be used 
to  compare  the  model  with  other  gold  deposits  in  the  WAC.  The  key  features  that  will  help  in 
classification include describing and characterising the mineralogical textures and their significance to ore 
forming processes, the alteration systems and the mineral association.  
Figure 1: Locality map of Mali (US Department of States). 
8

--- Page 10 ---
CHAPTER 2: Methodology 
Data Collection 
This research comprised two important tasks: petrographical work and field work which were preceded 
by  literature  review.  Field  work  was  completed  in  June  2009  and  involved  examining  drill-core  and 
mapping  of  the  host  rocks.  Six  drill  cores  from  the  Sadiola  Deep  Sulphide  project  were  examined  and 
these  include  SD022,  SD042,  SD048,  SD119,  SD129  and  SD782.  Samples  were  collected  in  2008  and 
polished thin sections were prepared by SGS Laboratories in Booysens, Johannesburg.  
Field  mapping  involved  mapping  of  the  West  High-Wall  of  the  main  pit  and  the  Helicopter  pit  at  the 
southern  end  of  the  main  Sadiola  pit.  At  each  station  point  the  following  (if  present)  were  recorded: 
lithology, bedding and cleavage orientation, faulting, folding, alteration and the distance from the station 
point to the face wall. Station points were distanced at 10R intervals at which R is the approximated to be 
1.02m. Stratigraphic facing was determined based on sedimentary features i.e. cross-bedding or turbidites. 
The measured orientations (strike/dip/dip direction) were plotted on equal area stereonet projection using 
the GeOrient© 9.4.0 software. 
Six  diamond  drill  cores  were  examined  based  on  the  lithological  contacts.    From  this,  the  depth  of  the 
drill  core  was  recorded,  as  well  as  alteration  and  mineralogy.  The  hole  size,  azimuth  and  dip  was 
recorded. Pits maps were provided by SEMOS on site. 
A petrographic study  was completed at University of the Witwatersrand. For each  thin section, mineral 
assemblage, mineral textures, cross-cutting relationship and sulphide mineralogy were recorded. 
9

--- Page 11 ---
CHAPTER 3: Regional Geology  
3.1 The geology of the West African Craton and the Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier 
The West African Craton (Fig. 2) is a piece of continental crust that has been stable since approximately 
1.7Ga (Dia et al., 1997). It is divided into the Man shield in the south and the Reguibat shield in the north. 
The  two  shields  are  separated  by  the  upper  Proterozoic  to  Paleozoic  sedimentary  Taoudeni  basin.  The 
Reguibat Rise and the Man terrains are composed of Archaean to Proterozoic rock formations (Potrel et 
al., 1998) with the Palaeoproterozoic rocks of the Man shield referred to as the Birimian sequence (Beziat 
et al., 2000).  
The Kêniêba and Kayes inliers are situated towards the western border of Senegal and Mali (Fig. 2).The 
WAC crops out in western Mali in what is known as the Kedougou-Kêniêba Inlier (Dia et al., 1997). The 
Birimian sequence represents a large sedimentary basin and a volcanic belt which correlates well with the 
2.1  Ga  accretion  period  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (Milesi,  1992)The  Palaeoproterozoic  Biriman 
Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier (KKI) in the West African Craton can be divided into three distinct domains: 
the  eastern,  central  and  the  western  domain  (Matabane  and  Hein,  submitted).  The  central  and  eastern 
domains are separated by the Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone (SMF) while the central and western domains 
are separated by the Main Transcurrent Shear Zone (MTZ) (Fig. 3). 
The  geology  of  these  domains  is  defined  largely  by  Boshoff  et  al.  (1989),  Ledru  et al.  (1991), Wilson, 
(2002), Dioh et al. (2006) and Gueye et al. (2008): 
* The western domain is composed of the Mako Supergroup, which is a volcanic sequence that consists of 
tholeiitic  basalt  and  andesite.  It  also  consists  of  tholeiitic  pillowed  basalt.  The  pillowed  basalt  have  an 
NMORB affinity, while the massive basalt has an enriched MORB composition. It is also characterised 
by  folded  low-grade  metamorphic  rocks  which  are  intruded  by  granitic  and  mafic  bodies.  The  Mako 
Supergroup  is  intruded  by  the  Sandikounda  Layered  Complex  and  the  Laminia  Kaourou  Plutonic 
Complex  (2160-2130  Ma).  The  NW-SE  trending  Mako  volcanic  belt  is  located  west  of  the  Main 
Transcurrent Zone. 
*The central domain is dominated by the Diale-Dalemé Supergroup which is a sedimentary to volcano-
sedimentary  unit.  It  is  composed  of  detrital  sedimentary  rocks  interbedded  with  calc-alkaline  volcanic 
rocks. The sedimentary rocks are isoclinally folded with the folds being upright and overturned to the SE-
direction.  It  is  intruded  by  the  Saraya  plutonic  complex  and  the  Balangouma  and  Boboti  plutons.    The 
Diale-Dalemé occurs with the Faleme volcanic belt which consists of andesite and felsic lava, with  
10

--- Page 12 ---
chemical  sediments  being  observed  throughout  the  belt.  The  Main  Transcurrent  Zone  follows  the 
lithological contact between the Mako and the Diale-Dalema Supergroups. 
*The  eastern  domain  hosts  the  Sadiola  goldfield  in  the  Kofi  Formaton  (Bishoff  et  al.,  1989;  Ranson, 
1998; Wilson, 2002). This formation is also referred to as the Dalema-Kofi Supergroup and lies east of 
the Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone. The Kofi Formation is dominated by metasedimentary rocks (Ranson, 
1998; Wilson, 2002). These rocks are classified as Biriman-type sediments and include greywacke, shale 
and graphitic shale with conglomeratic interbeds, banded iron formations and carbonates (Hanssen et al., 
1978). 
The Dalema-Kofi Supergroup is crosscut by tourmaline-rich quartz veins which are the primary host to 
gold  mineralisation  (Wilson,  2002)  in  the  Loulo  goldfield,  SSE  of  Sadiola,  near  the  town  of  Kêniêba. 
Ranson (1998) indicated that gold mineralisation occurs in pelitic shales.  The Dalema-Kofi sequence is 
currently  not  dated  (Dioh  et  al.,  2006;  Matabane,  2008).  It  is  transacted  by  the  Senegalo-Malian  Shear 
Zone with several gold deposits located in close proximity to the structure (Boshoff et al., 1998). 
11

--- Page 13 ---
Area of Study 
Figure. 2: Simplified geological map of the West African Craton (Dioh et al., 2006). 
12

--- Page 14 ---
Figure. 3: A simplified geological map of the Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier showing the location of the study 
area (redrawn from Dioh et al., 2006). 
13

--- Page 15 ---
3.2 The Geology of the Sadiola opencast mine and the Sadiola deposit  
The  Kofi  Formation  of  the  Kedougou-Kêniêba  Inlier  is  dominated  by  fine-grained  carbonaceous 
greywacke,  alternating  greywacke-shale  units,  impure  carbonates  which  were  folded  and  contain 
limestone beds, siltstone, minor tuff and volcanoclastics units (Boshoff et al, 1998; Hanssen et al., 1998; 
Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007a, b).  Jordaan et al. (1994) indicated that calcitic marbles occur in the Kofi 
Formation. The Sadiola goldfield consists of greywacke, siltstone, marble, carbonaceous to volcanoclastic 
greywacke  and  BIF  shale  (Hein  and  Tshibubudze,  2007a,  b).  The  goldfield  occurs  along  a  marble-
greywacke contact located east of the Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone (Hanssen et al., 1998). 
The greywacke units of the Sadiola goldfield are best developed to the west of the Sadiola Fracture Zone, 
while impure carbonates are best developed to the east. The Sadiola Fracture Zone is interpreted to be a 
splay  of  the  Senegalo-Malian  Shear  Zone.  Carbonate  units  are  the  main  host  to  the  Sadiola  deposit 
(Boshoff  et  al.,  1998).  The  lithologies  of  the  Sadiola  goldfield  show  evidence  of  macroscopic  to 
mesoscopic  slump  structures  (Hein  and  Tshibubudze,  2007a,  b).The  slump  structures  in  the  Sadiola 
goldfield  were  defined  by  Matabane  (2008)  in  the  FE3  open  casts,  but  occur  throughout  the  Sadiola 
goldfield. 
There is  however  a  lack  of  detailed  stratigraphy  for  the Kofi  Formation  in  the  literature.  Jordaan  et al. 
(1994)  outlined the  stratigraphy  of  the  Kofi  Formation:  the  formation  is  over  500m  in  thickness and  is 
dominated at the base by arenitic tourmalinite, overlain by green argillite, interbedded pink arenite, calc-
silicate, followed by the calcitic marble and pelite, which is locally dolomitised. The sequence is capped 
by fine-medium grained arenite, siltstone, tourmalinite and intermediate lava. The Sadiola hanging-wall is 
composed of greywacke (Sheets and Moore, 2000a; Hanssen, 1998; Van der Merwe, 2002; Hein, 2008) to 
metagreywacke  (Sheets  and  Moore,  2000b).  The  hanging-wall  consists  of  greywacke  unit,  carbonate 
bearing  units,  fine-grained  distal  turbidite  units,  tuffaceous  and  acid  volcanic  units  (Sheets  and  Moore, 
2000a, b). Sheets and Moore (2000a) used the Sadiola Fracture Zone as the division between the hanging 
wall and the footwall.  
The  footwall  consists  of  marble  which  is  interbedded  with  pelitic  beds.  Three  types  of  marble  are 
recognised  by  Hanssen  (1998)  and  include  contorted,  disrupted  and  transposed  marbles.  The  carbonate 
units  are  massive  to  bedded  texture  and  they  are  succeeded  by  a  slump  facies  (Hein,  2008).Quartz-
feldspar  porphyry  and  diorite  dykes  cross-cuts  both  the  hanging  wall  and  the  footwall  greywacke  and 
marble  units  respectively  (Moore  and  Sheets,  2000a,  b;  Ranson,  1998;  Hanssen  et  al,  1998).  The 
greywacke unit has been cross-cut again by dolomite and quartz veins (Ranson, 1998). 
14

--- Page 16 ---
3.3 Metamorphism  
Metamorphism  associated  with  the  Eburnean  orogeny  has  affected  the  Birimian  sequence  (Hastings, 
1982).  Metamorphic  grade  is  recorded  as  low-pressure  greenschist  facies  as  indicated  by  the  mineral 
assemblage muscovite, chlorite, + biotite mineral assemblage (Ledru et al., 1991). Liégeois et al., (1991) 
recognised  a  mineral  assemblage  indicative  of  the  biotite-chlorite  transition  in  the  greenschist  facies. 
These  greenschist  minerals  are  fine-grained  and  show  a  granoblastic  texture  with  no  indication  of 
porphyroblastic  texture.  Green  to  brown  biotite  and  cordierite  mineralogy  is  observed  in  contact-
metamorphic  aureoles  of  the  plutons.  The  carbonates  are  recrystallised  to  marbles  and  the  sequence 
reached hornblende hornfels facies occurs near the contact aureole of the granitoids (Ledru et al., 1991; 
Hein et al., 2004; Hein, 2009). 
Liégeois  et  al. (1991) concluded  that  metamorphism was  syn-tectonic  based  on the orientation  of  sheet 
silicates  and  amphiboles.  The  KKI  sediments  were  then  intruded  by  various  granitiod  plutons  which 
caused further metamorphism (Dioh et al., 2006). The four types of granitoids that intruded the sediments 
of  the  KKI  are  sodic  calc-alkaline  granitoids,  amphibole  bearing  granitoids,  pyroxene  and  K-bearing 
granitoids  and  the  peraluminous  biotite  bearing  units  (Dioh  et  al.,  2006).  In  the  Sadiola  goldfield,  two 
metamorphic  events  are  recorded:  regional  metamorphism 
to  greenschist  facies  and  contact 
metamorphism  (Hein  and  Tshibubudze,  2007a,  b).  Contact  metamorphism  is  defined  as  the 
metamorphism that  occurs  in  close proximity  to  intrusions  and has  formed  as a  result  of  heat  from  the 
intrusion (Blatt et al., 2006). Metamorphism at Sadiola reached hornblende-hornfels facies as a result of 
the emplacement of tonalite-granodiorite plutons and the tonalite dykes  (Hein and Tshibubudze,  2007a, 
b). 
3.4 Gold Mineralisation 
Three  types  of  gold  mineralisation  have  been  recognised  in  the  West  African  Craton.  These  are  pre-
orogenic,  syn-orogenic  and  late-orogenic  mineralisation.  Mineralisation  is  related  to  regional  tectonic 
event (Milesi et al, 1992; Beziat et al., 2008). Pre-orogenic deposits are associated with early extensional 
zones and are recorded in stratiform Au tourmalinite in the Loulo goldfield in Mali (Milési et al., 1991; 
Fouillac et al., 1993; Béziat et al., 2008). Syn-orogenic mineralisation is associated with mineralisation in 
disseminated  sulphides  in  volcanic  and  plutonic  rock  (Milési  et  al.,  1992).  Late-orogenic  deposits  are 
characterised by disseminated gold-bearing arsenopyrite and Au-quartz lode and quartz-vein type. These 
are interpreted as the major type and host of gold in West Africa (Milési et al., 1991).Two metallogenic 
styles  have  been  observed  in  the  Sadiola  goldfield  by  Hein  and  Tshibubudze  (2007a,  b)  and  these  are 
placer gold in the palaeochannels and screes and gold occurring in stockwork veins and breccias.  
15

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 4: Results 
4.1 Drill core results 
Sample description involved a detailed study of the core samples and describing the rock types, alteration 
sequence and paragenesis (if possible) of the overall individual core logs. The following table summarises 
the events from the drill core samples.  
Table 1. The paragenetic sequence observed in the samples from the six Borehole cores. 
Sequence of Events 
SD 129  SD 042  SD 022  SD 119 
SD 782  SD 048 
1. Deposition of the sediments 
2. Slump of sediments 
3. Lithification 
4. Fracturing and Dilation 
5. Vein development 
6. Silica rich vein 
7.  Sulphide  rich  deposits  in  the  
vein 
8. Disseminated sulphides 
9. Later Epidote and chlorite 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x (with calcite) 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Epidote 
Chlorite 
Sulphides 
The overall sequence of events includes: 
1.  (a) Deposition of sediments.  
(b). Slumping of sediments. 
2.  The sediments were lithified.  
3.  Fracturing and dilation and formation of open-space fill. 
4.  Precipitation of disseminated sulphides. 
5.  The  last  stage  is  the  development  of  epidote  and  chlorite.  The  chlorite  occurs  as  spots  in  the 
matrix. 
16

--- Page 18 ---
The observed lithologies in the drill cores are greywacke and marble unit. The major alteration types are 
calc-silicate,  potassic,  silicification  and  sulphidation.  The  major  ore  minerals  are  oxidized  pyrite  and 
pyrrhotite. Minor ankerite veins were also recognized in the marble unit. The greywacke and the marble 
unit  are  separated  by  an  oxidized  carbonaceous-siltstone  greywacke.  This  sequence  is  also  observed  in 
five  of  the  drill  cores. The  veins  that  cross-cut  the  greywacke  unit  are  zoned. These  are  quartz-calcite-
sulphides and pyrite-calcite-quartz zoning. Pyrite also develops as an open space fill. The mineralogy of 
the  greywacke  unit  showed  a  randomly  oriented  mineral  texture  and  with  chloritoid  spots,  euhedral 
hornblende and biotite in an equiangular texture in borehole SD129. This texture implies that the grains 
have triple point boundaries and are in textural equilibrium.  
The observed sequence in borehole SD782 is an oxide zone from about 93m to 183m that grades into a 
marble unit. The oxide zone is mainly composed of metasediments, sandy siltstone and a slump sequence. 
The  zone  is  Fe-altered.  Primary  bedding  has  been  destroyed  in  this  zone,  but  is  still  preserved  in  the 
marble  unit.  Soft  sediment  deformation  structures  were  observed  in  the  marble  unit.  Slumping  which 
occurred prior to the lithification processes are the main soft-sediment structures observed.  
The  carbonaceous-siltstone  greywacke  unit  grade  from  sulphidated  greywacke  at  the  contact  with  the 
greywacke  unit, to  a  sulphide rich zone and finally into a sulphidated carbonate  at the contact with the 
marble.  
17

--- Page 19 ---
A 
B 
C 
Host Rock: 
Inner Quartz-Calcite 
vein 
Outer Chlorite 
Epidote 
Host Rock: 
Host Rock: Marble 
Slump Structures 
Hematite (Sulphides) 
Matrix of biotite-
(feldspar)albite-quartz 
Figure. 4: Photographs of the drill core samples showing some of the observed mineralogy and textures. 
A: SD22-SD40: Soft Sediment structures and epidote mineralogy observed in the marble unit. B: SD22-
SD36:  Brecciated  marble  unit  with  later  sulphide  (hematite)  and  potassic-alteration  development.  C: 
SD119-SD59: Greywacke  unit  with  a  zoned  vein  of  outer  chlorite  and  inner  silica-calcite  and  sulphide 
composition. Photos taken by Prof.  Hein in 2007. 
18

--- Page 20 ---
4.2 Lithologies 
Mapping was undertaken in two areas in the Sadiola open  cast: West high-wall in the  main pit and the 
Helicopter pit located at the southern end of the main pit (Map 1 & 2). The main lithologies observed in 
the main pit are metagreywacke and carbonates.  The greywacke sequence is massive in texture and the 
visible  mineralogy  includes  quartz,  calcite,  minor  sulphide  and  epidote  in  some  cases.  The  carbonate 
sequence  becomes  friable  and  less  competent  at  the  contact  with  the  carbonaceous-siltstone  greywacke 
unit. This unit is interpreted as the Sadiola Fracture Zone (SFZ) as defined by Hein (2009) and Boshoff et 
al (1998). Pyrolusite, epidote and kaolinite occur in this zone and the zone is cross-cut by quartz veins. It 
is heavily oxidized, silicified and kaolinised meaning that the unit is very decomposed.  
A carbonate sequence is exposed in the pit face to the east of the Sadiola Fracture Zone. . The mineralogy 
of the carbonate sequence includes biotite, calcite and sulphide. The sequence is massive  at the contact 
with the SFZ, gradational with a bedded carbonate.  Euhedral crystals of hornblende and calcite crystals 
are  set  in  fine-grained  bedded  matrix  comprising  epidote,  sulphides,  calcite  and  quartz.  This  texture  is 
interpreted as a result of skarnification. Further to the east, the exposed carbonate sequence hosts micro-
folds. It varies from hornfels-biotite rich marble, epidote-rich marble and calcite-rich marble. An anticline 
is developed in the carbonate sequence. 
Three  upper  benches  were  mapped  in  the  Helicopter  pit  (Map  1).  These  benches  consist  of  sandy 
metasediments and are cross bedded. The metasediments include slump sequences with minor seismites. 
Primary  bedding  is  destroyed  in  some  of  the  metasediments.  The  sequence  is  fine-grained  and  hosts 
quartz veins. The helicopter metasediments are folded by a tight anticline with the fold hinge hosting a 
major fault (Fig. 5).  
19

--- Page 21 ---
f 
Figure. 5 : Metasediments of the Helicopter Pit. These are folded with a fault at the fold hinge. The fault 
is oriented at 0100/660/W. Photograph taken from the Helicopter Pit facing south. 
f 
20

--- Page 22 ---
4.3 Structure 
Two  deformation  events  are  recorded  for  the  study  areas  in  the  Sadiola  deposit.  These  are  interpreted 
from  equal  area  stereographic  projections  of  bedding  and  the  discontinuous,  parallel  cleavage  in  the 
metasedimentary  rocks.  The  equal  area  stereographic  projections  of  bedding  from  the  Helicopter  Pit 
records  a  calculated  mean  bedding  of  336o/64oE  with  a  calculated  mean  for  the  west  high-wall  of 
350o/51oW.    The  spread  of  the  data  around  the  primitive  circles  is  related  to  folding  about  a  NNW-
trending  fold  axes  (F1)  and  refolding  of  F1  about  the  ENE-ESE  trending  fold  axes  (F2).  Bedding  is 
rotated against minor faults (Fig. 6). 
A 
B 
Figure. 6: Equal area stereographic projection of bedding from A: Helicopter Pit & B: West High-wall in 
the main pit. 
The  equal  area  stereographic  projections  of  cleavage  of  the  Helicopter  Pit  records  a  calculated  mean 
cleavage of 343o/54E, however the data can be resolved into two data sets: a NNW trending set and a NE-
trending set (Fig. 7). Two sets of cleavages were also observed by Hein (2009) in which the ENE trending 
sets  (S2)  cross-cuts  the  NNW-trending  sets  (S1).  Unfortunately  this  cross-cutting  relationship  has  not 
been observed in the study area, but is accepted by the mine as a tectonic sequence for the Sadiola pit. 
The  calculated  mean  for the  NNW-trending  cleavage  is  332o/60oE,  while  the ENE trending  cleavage  is 
061O/43OS. The spread of data about the primitive circle for the NNW-trending cleavage is as a result of 
folding by F2 (Fig. 7). 
21

--- Page 23 ---
A 
A1 
A2 
Figure. 7 : Equal area stereographic projections of cleavage from Helicopter Pit. The data is resolved into 
two data sets : A1= S1 & A2= S2. 
Stereographic  projections  for  the  cleavage  from  the  west  high-wall  in  the  main  pit  is  not  presented 
because only five  data  points were collected and were  therefore considered to be  insufficient. However 
the calculated mean was 213O/72OE. 
22

--- Page 24 ---
Rose diagrams for quartz veins from the Helicopter Pit and the west high-wall are presented in Figure 8. 
The  dominant  trend  of  quartz  veins  in  the  Helicopter  Pit  is  NE  with  sub-ordinate  trend  towards  NNE, 
while  the  dominant  trend of  the  quartz  veins in  the  west  high-wall  is NNE  with  the  sub-ordinate trend 
towards NNW. The quartz veins elsewhere in the main pit are folded by F2 (Hein, 2009) indicating that 
the  veins  formed  prior  to  S2.  The  relationship  between  S1  in  the  Helicopter  Pit  and  the  dominant 
orientation of quartz veins suggest that they formed at the same time during the NE directed compression. 
This is because bedding and cleavage verge towards NE.   
A 
B 
n=28 
n=15 
Figure. 8: Rose diagrams for the A: Helicopter Pit and the B: Main Pit quartz veins. 
23

--- Page 25 ---
4.4 Petrography 
The lithologies of the Sadiola gold mine vary from bedded/skarnified marble to marble and greywacke. 
They  range  from  fine-grained  to  coarse-grained.  The  boundary  between  the  textures  is  marked  by 
randomly oriented biotite (Fig. 9) although this texture was not observed in all the samples. The matrix 
minerals are biotite, calcite, dolomite, quartz and minor feldspar (albite), chloritoid, chlorite, hornblende, 
cordierite,  epidote  and tourmaline  (Fig.  9,  10,  11).  Magnetite  is  an  accessory  mineral.  Minor  cordierite 
occurs  with  hornblende  in  sample  SD782-SD16.  The  dominant  alteration  types  are  potassic,  chlorite, 
carbonatization (dolomitisation) and sulphidation. The biotite has been altered to chlorite, and chlorite is 
also accompanied by potassic alteration. Potassic alteration is shown by the development of the albite and 
it  overprints  quartz.  The  alteration  paragenesis  sequence  is  interpreted  as:  silicification  –  calc-
silicate/propylitic  –  dolomitisation  –  potassic  alteration  &  biotite-chlorite  –  sulphidation.    Propylitic 
alteration is indicated  by  the  occurrence  of chlorite, epidote  and  tremolite.   Evidence  of  deformation is 
shown by kinked to radiating biotite, stylolites and a triple point grain contact between the dolomite. This 
is the interpreted as a result of pressure solution.  
Stylolites  were  recorded  between  the  calcite.  Biotite  is  generally  absent  in  epidote-rich  samples. 
Chloritoid  overgrowths  were  also  recorded  with  some  being  zoned  and  euhedral.  The  zoned  chloritoid 
consists of an inner semi-rounded crystal. The chloritoid are interpreted to have precipitated late as they 
cross-cut  the  quartz-albite-epidote  matrix  and  the  coarse  calcite  veins.  Minor  muscovite  and  tremolite 
were  observed  in  sample  SD22-SD51B  (meta-greywacke),  and  are  associated  with  potassic  and 
dolomitisation  alteration.  Two  generations  of  dolomite  have  been  identified.  The  early  dolomite  forms 
part of the matrix and the later is vein dolomite. Two generations of calcite were also identified: matrix 
calcite  and  later  coarser  calcite  in  veins.    Sulphide  mineralogy  also  occurs  in  two  generations: 
disseminated  and  vein  sulphides.  The  following  paragenesis  was  observed  for  the  Sadiola  mineralogy: 
quartz – calcite – dolomite - biotite – sulphides – dolomite with sulphides-quartz-calcite vein – chloritoid.  
24

--- Page 26 ---
A 
Fine-grained matrix 
3mm 
3mm 
Biotite 
Coarse-grained calcite 
Figure. 9: Photomicrograph of biotite separating the fine-grained matrix of biotite-calcite and the coarse-
grained  calcite  from  sample  SD22-SD37B  (Marble).  There  is  no  observed  biotite  mineralogy  in  the 
coarse-grained calcite. 
B 
C 
3mm 
3mm 
Figure.  10:  B.  Photomicrograph  of  SD782-SD29.  Rhomb-shaped  dolomite  and  calcite  in  a  breccia.  C. 
SD782-SD33. Biotite and calcite matrix with the biotite cross-cutting the coarse-grained calcite veins. 
25

--- Page 27 ---
D 
E 
Chlorite 
Biotite-Chlorite matrix 
K-alteration 
3mm 
3mm 
Pyrite 
Figure.  11:    Photomicrographs  of  D:  SD129-SD77.  Chlorite  alteration  developed  in  a  potassic-altered 
sample. Less than 1% of sulphide mineralogy can be observed in this sample.  
E: SD119-SD60B. Chlorite-biotite alteration developing around the zoned tourmalines crystals. Sulphide 
precipitation (mainly pyrite) occurs in the open spaces on the rock and the tourmaline crystals. 
26

--- Page 28 ---
4.5 Ore Petrography 
The  main  sulphides  in  the  samples  include  pyrite  and  arsenopyrite  with  minor  pyrrhotite.  The 
arsenopyrite crystals are euhedral. Pyrite is irregular, anhedral and exhibits a variety of textures including 
framboidal,  colloform,  zoning,  skeletal  and  atoll  texture.  The  colloform  pyrite  is  cross-cut  by  a  later, 
elongated arsenopyrite crystal. It also forms as open space fill. Pyrite inclusions occur in the arsenopyrite 
indicating  that  the  pyrite  is  early.  Both  the  pyrite  and  the  arsenopyrite  also  occur  in  veins.  The  outer 
margin of the arsenopyrite veins were occupied by pyrite. Pyrite also develops in the margins of a calcite-
rich vein. Concentric layering and botryoidal texture were developed in the pyrite vein. 
Minor gold was observed on the pyrite edges/margins with a very small percentage disseminated in the 
matrix, i.e. SD782-SD17A.   Less than 1% of octahedral magnetite was observed. Chalcopyrite occurs as 
inclusions  in  the  hematite  and  sphalerite  indicating  that  the  chalcopyrite  is  earlier.  It  also  occurs  as  an 
open  space  fill  between  the  pyrite.  The  following  paragenetic  sequence  was  observed  for  the  ore 
mineralogy:  pyrite-chalcopyrite  +  (sphalerite +  hematite)  –  arsenopyrite. The ore  minerals  and the  host 
rocks were then brecciated as shown in sample SD129-SD72C. Open space fill texture is shown in Figure 
12 with Figure 13 also show brecciation. 
Pyrite 
Colloform 
Pyrite 
3mm 
3mm 
Late 
Arsenopyrite 
Figure. 12: Photomicrograph of Sample SD129-SD66.  A: Concentric-colloform texture displayed by the 
pyrite.  B:  Colloform  pyrite  and  the  host  rock  (silica)  being  cross-cut  by  the  elongated  arsenopyrite 
crystals. 
27

--- Page 29 ---
A 
B 
1mm 
1mm 
Figure.  13:  Photomicrograph  of  Sample  SD  SD782-SD17A.  Breccia  composed  of  massive  pyrite  and 
biotite crystals. Taken from A: Reflected and B: Transmitted light 
A 
Pyr 
Aspy 
1mm 
Pyr 
B 
Aspy 
0.5mm
Figure. 14:  Photomicrograph of Sample SD129-SD71. Euhedral arsenopyrite (Aspy) and anhedral pyrite 
(Pyr) which is earlier. Rhombohedral, late arsenopyrite with the pyrite in photomicrograph B. 
28

--- Page 30 ---
CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION 
5.1 Depositional Environment 
The development of seismites is interpreted as a result of either a seismic activity. These correlate with 
the seismites recorded by Mazumder et al (2006) which are deformations that occurred in unconsolidated 
sediments mainly as a result of shock. Soft sediment deformation is represented by slump facies recorded 
on both the Helicopter pit and the drill cores. Slumping in interpreted to have succeeded the deposition of 
the sediments and these occur mainly in continental slopes, seismically active environments and prior to 
the  consolidation  of  sediments.  The  slump  sequence  of  the  main  Sadiola  open  cast  can  therefore  be 
correlated  with  that  of  the  ancilliary  pits  defined  by  Matabane  (2008).  They  can  also  be  interpreted  to 
have formed due to overloading, rapid sedimentation, over-steepening of slopes by earthquakes (Bagati, 
2008). The slumps structures are therefore interpreted to have formed in continental slope or a seismically 
active area before the sediments were lithified.  
The sandy-metasediments and metagreywacke are deposits of fluvial to marine systems. Fluvial deposits 
are cross bedded, similar to the cross-bedded sandy-metasediments of the Helicopter Pit. They are also 
influenced  by  the  velocity  of  water  moving  the  particles.  The  metagreywacke  are  deposits  of  shallow 
marine  waters.  The  cross-bedded  sandy-metasediments  corresponds  to  the  sandstones  of  Martin  and 
Turner  (1998)  and  Tucker  (2001),  which  are  deposited  on  high  kinetic  environments  including  braided 
rivers,  deltas,  shallow  marine  and  continental  margins.  The  shallow-marine  metagreywacke  are 
interpreted by Tucker (2001) to have been deposited by turbidity currents mainly off continental margins. 
The turbidites were deposited as a result of turbidity currents.  They greywacke observed in the field are 
similar  to  that  of  Dampare  et  al.  (2004)  which  are  fine-medium  grained  and  show  some  degree  of 
metamorphism.  The  Helicopter  pit  metasediments  are  also  similar  in  that  they  are  massive  and  show 
minimal sedimentary structures. These  are therefore interpreted to have formed in an active continental 
margin tectonic setting (Dampare et al., 2004). 
From  the  interpretation  and  the  comparison  made  above,  the  Sadiola  open  cast  lithologies  are 
representative of continental and shelf margins. This is based on the fact that along these settings, there is 
sediment  instability,  turbidity  currents,  slumps  and  rapid  sedimentation.  The  sandy  metasediments  are 
deposits of fluvial to shallow marine settings. 
29

--- Page 31 ---
5.2 Structural Interpretation 
The two deformation phases that are identified in the study areas of the Sadiola goldfield correlate with 
the  deformation  phases  interpreted  by  Hein  (2009)  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  in  Burkina  Faso, 
Tshibubudze  et  al.,  (2009)  in  the  Markoye  Shear  Zone  in  Burkina  Faso.  The  first  deformation  is 
characterized  by  the  development  of  NNW-trending  folds  (F1).  NNW  bedding  and  cleavage  (S1) 
orientation associated with D1 are recorded in the study area. This deformation is termed the Tangaean 
Event and formed during the NE-SW shortening period. Quartz veins formed during this event and their 
dominant trend is towards NNE-NE.  
The second deformation event is characterized by the development of ENE-ESE trending folds (F2) and 
NE-trending  cleavage  (S2).  The  ENE  trending  fold  axes  concur  with  Voet’s  (1997).    The  second 
deformation correlates with the 2.13 - 1.98 Ga Eburnean orogeny as defined by Feybesse et al (2006).  A 
conclusion can thus be made that the rocks of the Sadiola open cast mine underwent at least two phases of 
deformation.  
5.3 Petrographic Interpretation 
Majority  of  the  recorded  mineral  assemblage  are  interpreted  to  have  formed  in  conditions  of  contact 
metamorphism, hornfels facies and at low temperature settings. They are of metamorphic origin. These 
assemblages  are  of  lower  greenschist  metamorphic  facies.  Brecciation  occurred  in  the  marble  and  is 
attributed  to  have  resulted  from  the  fluids  passing  through  the  rock.  This  is  consistent  with  the 
interpretation of Theron’s (1997a) that gold skarns develop where carbonates are present. These fluids are 
also  responsible  for  the  deposition  of  calcite  and  sulphide  (mainly  pyrite)  in  the  open  spaces.  The 
occurrence  of  albite  is  interpreted  as  a  result  of  the  hydrothermal  introduction  of  Na  into  the  system 
(Theron, 1997a). The fluids at the Sadiola open cast are therefore interpreted to be hydrothermal in origin. 
The texture displayed by the biotite (Fig. 6) is the syntaxial deposition of biotite which is followed by an 
open  space  fill  of  calcite.  Under  conditions  of  contact  metamorphism,  there  is  a  spatial  relationship 
between the intrusion and the mineralisation. The mineralisation is observed in the low temperature rocks 
located further away from the high temperature setting closer to the intrusion.  
Chlorite  replaces  biotite  and  this  texture  is  accompanied  by  potassic  alteration.  Potassic  alteration 
recorded consists of biotite, quartz and potassic feldspar (mainly albite). Carbonate alteration is present in 
the  form  of  dolomite  rather  than  calcite.  Dolomite  is  recystallising  at  the  expense  of  calcite.  Sulphide 
precipitation  occurs  with  biotite.  An  increased  biotite  concentration  occurs  with  higher  sulphide 
precipitation. The  occurrence  of  epidote  and  chlorite is  interpreted  as the  alteration  of  hornblende. The 
occurrence of tourmaline is interpreted to have resulted from the infiltration of boron-rich fluids (London, 
1986) while the cordierite can be as a result of high-grade hornfels metamorphism.   
30

--- Page 32 ---
The vein growth that has been recorded from thin sections is crack-seal and open space fill and these are 
mainly  quartz-carbonate  and  quartz-sulphide  veins.  An  association  between  sulphide  precipitation  and 
biotite-chlorite  alteration  is  observed.  The  veinlets  are  interpreted  as  to  have  formed  during  brittle 
deformation with the presence of stylolitic structures indicating dissolution.  These features correlate with 
those of Wilson (2002b). 
The  radial/concentric  textures  observed  in  Figure  9  are  due  to  physical  and  chemical  variation  in  fluid 
chemistry.  The  skeletal  and  framboids  pyrite  textures  are  common  in  rapidly  cooling  rocks  and  at  low 
temperatures. The skeletal intergrowths of pyrite are the replacements products of pyrrhotite and they are 
associated  with  retrograde  replacement  of  amphiboles  (Edwards,  1947).  The  ore  mineral-suite  for  the 
Sadiola gold mine includes Au-As-Fe-S and minor Zn-Sb-Cu. This ore mineral suite has been recorded in 
the  study  area  by  Wilson  (2002a).    The  temperature  range  at  which  the  pyrite-arsenopyrite-gold 
mineralisation forms was recorded by Mikus and Chovan (2003) to be in a range of 385 – 465 0C, and this 
was in the Au-Sb mineralisation.  
The biotite texture observed in figure 9 can therefore be interpreted as the biotite isograd defined by Blatt 
and Tracy (2006) which is represented by the equation: muscovite + quartz + ankerite = biotite + calcite + 
carbon dioxide. The presence of chlorite in the biotite rocks indicates that the chlorite is also as a result of 
the above equation. 
The recorded  calc-silicate  and  potassic  alteration  is  similar  to that  of  Boshoff  et  al,  (1998) and Theron 
(1997a).  Gold  and  pyrite-arsenopyrite  assemblage  are  interpreted  to  have  formed  during  the  potassic-
alteration  stage  (Boshoff  et  al.,  1998).  This  stage  is  also  associated  with  the  chlorite-biotite  alteration 
during  carbonate  alteration.  The  observed  skarnification  in  the  carbonate  are  characterised  by  biotite, 
amphiboles,  pyrite,  magnetite  and calcite. These  are  as  a  result  of  fluid  flux  into  the carbonate system. 
Theron  (1997a)  indicated  that  this  is  due  to  the  introduction  of  Si,  Fe  and  Mg  by  hydrothermal  fluids 
during contact metamorphism and the alteration development.   
Gold  mineralisation  is  interpreted  to  occur  with  chlorite-biotite  alteration.  This  is  also  associated  with 
potassic  alteration.  It  is  relatively  associated  with  the  pyrite-arsenopyrite  mineral  assemblage.  It  is  also 
interpreted to occur along the biotite isograd which occurs between the inner to middle contact aureoles 
(Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007a, b). Gold mineralisation forms along the Sadiola Fracture Zone interpreted 
as  the  carbonaceous-siltstone  greywacke  unit.  The  chlorite-biotite  alteration  and  the  breakdown  of 
hornblende into epidote, chlorite and quartz occur along the inner-middle transition boundary. Carbonate 
alteration is interpreted to have formed in association with the gold forming stages.  
The resulting fluid circulation, textures observed and the occurrence of the contact aureoles indicate that 
the  Sadiola  gold  mine  and  the  resulting  mineralisation  have  a  spatial  and  temporal  relationship  to 
31

--- Page 33 ---
intrusions. The mineralisation at Sadiola  is therefore interpreted to be as a result of metamorphism and 
deformation  brought  about  the  Sekokoto  pluton  emplacement  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny.  Structural 
data  indicate  that  quartz  veins  formed  prior  to  the  development  of  the  S2  cleavage  systems.  These  are 
therefore  interpreted  to  be  post-Tangaean  and  pre-Eburnean  and  are  associated  with  minor  pyrite-
arsenopyrite  mineralisation.  Mineralisation  was  therefore  upgraded  by  pluton  emplacement  and  the  re-
activation  of  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and  the  remobilisation  of  fluids  to  cause  brecciation  and 
skarnification of the carbonate unit. The fluids have moderate to high salinity as determined by Pan and 
Fleet (1992) from calcite-dolomite geothermometry. 
5.4 Comparison to Sadiola goldfield with the rest of the West African Gold deposits 
The Sadiola deposits share some similarities with the other gold deposits in the West African Craton. In 
the nearby FE3 open cast, two styles of gold mineralisation were recorded by Matabane (2008). These are 
gold mineralisation in the breccia lodes and in the upper slump facies which co-exists with arsenopyrite-
pyrite  assemblage  and  the  secondary  placer  gold  mineralisation.  Similar  occurrence  of  orogenic  gold 
systems are recorded in Ghana, Senegal, Burkina Faso, Guinea and Cote d’Ivoire (Goldfarb et al., 2001). 
Primary gold deposits in Burkina Faso are classified as orogenic-type gold deposits (Béziat et al., 2008) 
with  the  differences  from  the  Sadiola  documented  in  the  style  of  gold  mineralisation.  Two  styles  of 
mineralisation  observed  in  Burkina  Faso  are  quartz-vein  and  disseminated  (Béziat  et  al.,  2008). 
Disseminated  sulphides  gold  mineralisation  described  by  Béziat  et  al  (2008)  are  interpreted  to  be 
equivalent  to  the  sulphide-ore  type  of  Ashanti  and  Chirano  deposits  in  Ghana  and  Yaouré-Angovia 
deposits in Cote d’Ivoire.  The Loulo goldfield, SSE of Sadiola, is characterised by gold mineralisation 
which is hosted in the Kofi Formation in tourmaline-rich quartz veins (Wilson, 2002). The Loulo deposit 
is associated with earlier extensional veins and occurs mainly in the Lower Birimian sequence (Fouillac et 
al., 1993; Béziat et al., 2008). In Ghana, gold mineralisation occurs in conglomerate beds in the Tarkwa 
District (Milési et al., 1992). Gold occurs also in five parallel NE-trending greenstone belts in Ghana. 
32

--- Page 34 ---
CHAPTER 6: Conclusion 
•  The mineral assemblages of the Sadiola open cast are representative of greenschist metamorphic 
facies. 
•  Sadiola lithologies underwent at least two deformation events: one associated with the Tangaean 
event (D1) and the latter associated with the Eburnean orogeny (D2). 
•  The  quartz  veins  are  interpreted  to  have  formed  in  the  D1  event  during  a  NE-directed 
compression. 
•  Sadiola  lithologies  underwent  two  metamorphic  events:  regional  metamorphism  to  lower 
greenschist facies and contact metamorphism to hornblende-hornfels facies. 
•  Gold  mineralisation  is  associated  with  a  variety  of  alteration  system  with  pyrite-arsenopyrite 
mineral assemblage. 
•  Mineralisation  tends  to  occur  along  the  carbonate-greywacke  contact  which  is  from  the  inner 
contact aureole to the middle aureole. 
•  The  transition  from  the  inner  to  middle  contact  aureole  is  indicated  by  the  breakdown  of 
hornblende into chlorite, epidote and quartz and from rocks that were completely recrystallised to 
rocks in which the primary bedding is preserved. 
•  This  is  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  which  was  re-activated  during  pluton  emplacement  and  was 
used as the pathway for moderate-high salinity fluids. 
•  The Sadiola open cast mine is interpreted as an Intrusion related gold deposit or a thermal aureole 
gold deposits associated with the Sekokoto plutons.         
33
