
--- Page 2 ---
FRONTISPIECE 
“Wherefore smelting is necessary, for by this means earths, solidified juices, and stones are separated 
from the metals so that they obtain their proper colour and become pure, and may be of great use to 
mankind in many ways. When the ore is smelted, those things which were mixed with the metal before 
it  was  melted  are  driven  forth,  because  the  metal  is  perfected  by  fire  in  this  manner.  Since 
metalliferous ores differ greatly amongst themselves, first as to the metals which they contain, then as 
to the quantity of the metal which is in them, and then by the fact that some are rapidly melted by fire 
and others slowly, there are, therefore, many methods of smelting.” (Agricola, 1556) 
2

--- Page 7 ---
DEDICATED 
To my wonderful son, Gundo Nethavhanani, 
the one who motivates me to be a responsible mother and 
encourages me to work to my very best. 
7

--- Page 8 ---
LIST OF FIGURES 
Frontispiece “Wherefore smelting is necessary, for by this means earths, solidified juices, and stones 
are separated from the metals so that they obtain their proper colour and become pure, and may 
be of great use to mankind in many ways. When the ore is  smelted, those things which were 
mixed with the metal before it was melted are driven forth, because the metal is perfected by 
fire in this manner. Since metalliferous ores differ greatly amongst themselves, first as to the 
metals which they contain, then as to the quantity of the metal which is in them, and then by the 
fact that some are rapidly melted by fire and others slowly, there are, therefore, many methods 
of smelting.” (Agricola, 1556) 
Figure 1.1: Photograph of a typical modern day artisanal forge that is operated by one man, with a 
single pump and a number of small crucibles. The tuyere is clearly visible. A goat skin bellows 
would  have  been  placed  over  the  bellows  hole  to  pump  air  into  the  tuyere.  This  particular 
working forge is on exhibition at the Museum of Kaya and is presented with the permission of 
the Museum. 
Figure 1.2: Location of the study area in Burkina Faso, northeast of the capital city of Ouagadougou 
and 17 km northwest of the regional centre of Kaya. The study area is located near the village 
of Dem and west of the Lac (Lake) Dem in the Goren greenstone belt. 
Figure  1.3:  Photographs  of  the  elders  of  the  village  of  Liligomde  who  provided  the  ethnographic 
background to this study (a, b, e). Their information indicated that no artisanal mining for iron 
had taken place at Dem in their lifetimes. The senior elders ranged in age from 75-104 and they 
were  the  senior  blacksmiths  of  the  Chief  Naba  of  the  Mossi  people.  Consequently,  it  can  be 
reasonably  assumed  that  the  Dem  site  is  older  than  80  years.  Artisanal  mining  for  iron  is 
conducted west of the village of Liligomde (c) with smelting in the village on small crucibles. 
Iron rich spongy ferricrete is used for smelting (d) which makes tools for local agricultural use. 
The  elderly  gentleman  in  (e)  made  his  own  gun  from  smelting  local  iron.  Photographs  are 
reproduced  with  permission  of  the  village  elders.  (f)  Ethnographic  data  was  collected  by 
interview  and  data  was  recorded  in  a  notebook  with  translations  from  Mossi  to  French  and 
English as facilitated by Mr Bamogo Makido of the Museum of Kaya (squatting).  
Figure 2.1: Schematic of furnace, showing temperatures and reactions during smelting (Cleere. 1981, 
Figure  6).  I  =  Roasting  zone,  II  =  Indirect  reduction  zone,  II  =  Oxidation  zone,  IV  =  Direct 
reduction in hearth, V = Slag bath and outlet. 
8

--- Page 9 ---
Figure  2.2:  A  Fe-FeO–Fe2O3–SiO2  slag  phase  diagram  at  varying  temperatures  redrawn  from 
Schuhmann et al. (1953), the temperatures is in degrees centigrade. 
Figure 3.1: Photographic mosaic of the Dem site constructed from GoogleEarth images. Location of 
the  town  of  Dem  along  the  main  road  to  Kaya  is  shown.  Sites  of  Opencast  (OC)  mining, 
underground  (UG)  mines  and  forges/  furnaces  are  also  presented.  The  mine  site  is  wholly 
located  east  of  the  major  ridge  on  an  alluvial  plain.  Lac  Dem  is  located  east  of  the  town  of 
Dem. 
Figure 3.2: Geology and layout of the Dem site. Open cast mines 1-3 are located on the eastern side 
of  a  ridge  of  ferricrete  duricrust  and  immediately  east  of  ferricrete  scree  in  Fe-Mn  rich 
metasedimentary rocks, and adit to UG 1-2 underground mines is located above the open casts. 
Forges/Furnaces  1-11  are  situated  on  the  alluvium  plain  blow  the  open  cast  mines.  Waste 
dumps are situated proximal to the furnace sites. 
Figure 4.1: Photographs of vein-hosted iron ore from adits in the underground mines of the Dem iron 
site.  A.  Massive  siltstone  hosting  hosting  zones  of  iron  staining.  Numerous  fine  vein  rich 
veinlets  crosscut  the  host  rock.  B.  Interlocking  network  of  iron  rich  veinlets.  C.  Quartz  vein 
cataclasite veins surrounded by a wide alteration zone of iron enriched siltstone. D. A complex 
zone of alteration in massive siltstone. 
Figure  4.2:  Laterite-ferricrete  plateau and  outcrops  occur  across  the  Dem  region.  A.  Photograph  of 
recemented ferricrete in the foreground with ferricrete plateau in the back ground. B. Ferricrete 
overlying massive siltstone unit in the Dem region. C. Ferricrete plateau in the background is 
composed  of  the  profile  in  photograph  D.  Several  layers  of  ferricrete  development  can  be 
interpreted from the profile.  
Figure 4.3: The two surface mines consist of bowl-shaped opencast pits that are approximately 500-
600m  in  diameter.  The  most  significant  is  pit  1  which  has  worked  a  considerable  volume  of 
primary  ore  dislodged  from  outcrops  above  the  opencast,  in  a  natural  valley.  Iron  rich 
cataclasite veins also crop out across the floor of the open cast. Underground workings (UG 1) 
occur between the two open casts with adit/entrance located high on a rock face (as marked). 
Open cast pit 2 worked mainly ferricrete scree that roll down from the laterite plateau above. 
Figure 4.4: Underground Mine 1 (UG1) consists of a series of drifts, galleries, adits and tunnels that 
accessed  primary  in-situ  iron  ore  from  the  selvedge  of  quartz  cataclasite  veins.  The  galleries 
were too dangerous to enter but the workings were considerable. 
9

--- Page 10 ---
Figure  4.5:  Iron  smelting  at  the  Dem  site  is  evidenced  from  the  remains  of  at  least  11  furnace 
(furnace wall and floor fragments), and hundreds of fragments of tuyeres, crucible, burnt clay 
and  iron  slag.  A.  Burnt  clay  of  the  furnace  wall.  B.  Furnace  2  which  is  representative  of  all 
furnace in the Dem mine site. They are typically round with flat or bowl shaped floors. C and 
D. Tuyeres are scattered around many of the furnaces or welded into the floor of the furnaces 
with slag. E and F. Crucibles made of clay-sand are also found proximal to the furnace site of 
welded together with slag.  
Figure 4.6: Processing sites at the Dem site. A and B. Numerous processing and slag dump sites are 
located  near  the  mines  and  adjacent  to  furnaces  and  scattered  throughout  the  area.  They 
indicated that the ore was beneficiated before use in the furnace, or that slag was removed from 
the ore after smelting. C. Section through a slag dump site next to a furnace 8. It is clear that a 
significant amount of forging had taken place at Furnace 8. 
Figure 4.7: Photographs of the different types of slag in found at the Dem mine site. A. Fragment of 
glassy slag resembling obsidian found throughout the Dem site at all furnaces is consequent of 
rapid  cooling.  B.  Flow  type  slag  from  Furnace  5  which  is  forms  during  slow  cooling  from  a 
high temperature melt. C. Coarse grained slag from Furnace 5 formed by slow cooling rate at a 
relatively constant temperature. D. a dense black-grey flowing type that resulted from a slow 
cooling  rate  in  cow-pat  form,  E.  Spinifex  texture  which  forms  due  to  quenching  at  high 
temperature. F. Vesicular slag with vugs that formed  due to the release of gas bubbles in the 
melt. 
Figure  4.8:  A  number  of  stone  tools  (A  B)  litter  the  Dem  site  specifically  long  old  tracks  (C,  D) 
which  link  the  furnace  sites  and  the  mine  sites,  and  around  furnaces  site.  By  and  large,  the 
purpose or use of these artefacts is not known. 
Figure 5.1: A. Transmitted light photomicrographs of siltstone from sample LD001 SN-114. Siltstone 
units  are  composed  of  quartz  (light  grey)  and  goethite  (black),  with  accessory  epidote  and 
sericite.  B.  Transmitted  light  photomicrographs  of  iron  rich  carbonaceous  shale  from  sample 
LD003  SN-116.  Iron  oxides  are  made  up  of  hematite-goethite  ±  sericite  (black).  Carbonate-
quartz  makes  up  the  remainder  of  the  matrix  (white).  C.  Transmitted  light  photograph  of 
chloritized basalt (Sample LD002 SN115). The basalt is composed of chlorite (after pyroxene), 
sericite,  epidote  and  quartz,  with  minor  relict  plagioclase.  Opaque  minerals  are  goethite  ± 
hematite  (black).  D.  Transmitted  light  photomicrograph  of  ferruginous  silicrete  (Sample  LD 
016, SN121). The silicrete is made up of nodules of goethite and chalcedonic quartz enclosing 
rock  fragments  particularly  around  pisoliths.  The  rock  fragments  are  also  cemented  with 
goethite and chalcedonic quartz. 
10

--- Page 11 ---
Figure  5.2:  A.  Photomicrograph  of  Fe-rich  ore  bearing  siltstone  in  transmitted  light  (cross-polars) 
which is dominated by goethite-hematite (Sample LD 013, SN-118). B. Quartz cataclasite vein 
at  the  base  of  the  valley  in  open  pit  1.  Fe-rich  fractures  and  micro-faults  crosscut  the  quartz 
veins  and  wall  rock  indicating  they  formed  after  the  quartz  vein.  Photomicrographs  from 
Sample LD 013, SN-118 in transmitted (C.), transmitted crossed polars (D.) and reflected light 
of quartz cataclasite demonstrating that hematite-goethite dominate veins and fractures which 
crosscut quartz in quartz veins. 
Figure  5.3: Type  1  dense black  glassy  slag  with  flow  texture from  Furnace  5.  B.  Type  2  vesicular 
green-black blocky slag from Furnace 10. 
Figure  5.4:  Photomicrographs  of  slag  from  the  Dem  mine  site.  A.  Fine  to  coarse  skeletal  hematite 
with  spinifex in  a  hematite  matrix from  Furnace  4.  B.  Herringbone  textured  hematite-wüstite 
(Wu)  with  ocelli  of  fayalite  (Fa)  and  quartz  (Qtz),  and  vesicles  (V)  in  a  hematite  matrix.  C. 
Intergrown  massive  hematite  and  semplectic  hematite.  D.  Beautiful  skeletal  structure  of 
hematite  spinifex  in  hematite  matrix.  E.  Cross-formed  wüstite  (Wu)  in  subhedral  to  anhedral 
hematite in a hematite matrix. F. Skeletal herringbone texture hematite in a hematite matrix. F1, 
F2, F4, F5 = Furnace 1, 2, 4 or 5. 
Figure 5.5: Photomicrographs and sketch from Furnace 9 of fayalite in a hematite spinifex (A, B) and 
as ocelli, as fill or the lining of vesicles (as amygdules), and fill to fractures that crosscut the 
hematite matrix of the slag. 
Figure 5.6: Photomicrograph of micro-fault, fractures and hematite veinlets crosscut the spinifex and 
herringbone textured hematite. 
Figure 6.1: Sampling points from different furnaces. a. Sampling points for furnace 2 from furnace 
walls.  b.-c.  Sampling  points  for  furnace  5  from  furnace  and  tuyere  fragments.  d.  Sampling 
points  for  furnace  6  from  the  exposed  stratigraphy  of  the  furnace.  e.  Sampling  points  for 
furnace  8  from  the  exposed  layers  of the furnace.  F.  Sampling  point  for  furnace  11  from  the 
furnace walls. 
Figure 6.2: Radiocarbon calibration curve organic material extracted from Furnace 6 (Sample FOR06 
02CAR). Radiocarbon age (BP) is plotted against calendar years (AD). White bars correspond 
to 68% and grey bars correspond to 95% confidence levels, respectively. The 95% confidence 
level gives an age 1438-1458 AD. 
Figure 6.3: Radiocarbon calibration curve organic material extracted from Furnace 6 (Sample FOR08 
02CAR). Radiocarbon age (BP) is plotted against calendar years (AD). White bars correspond 
to 68% and grey bars correspond to 95% confidence levels, respectively. The 95% confidence 
level gives ages (1438-1458, 1651-1600, 1756-1759, and 1949-1951) AD.  
11

--- Page 12 ---
LIST OF TABLES 
Table  3.1:  The  characteristics  of  selected  samples  that  were  sent  to  the  laboratory  for  AMS 
radiocarbon dating. 
Table  6.1:  Results  of  samples  processed  and  calibrated  by  Beta  Analytic  using  the  Pretoria 
Calibration Procedure program (Talma and Vogel, 1993). 
Table 6.2: Radiocarbon ages from the study area, the dates have been calibrated with the INTCAL04 
Radiocarbon Age Calibration after Talma and Vogel (1993). 
12

--- Page 13 ---
ABSTRACT 
Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) has been a crucial industry in Africa for centuries. In 
Burkina  Faso  approximately  95  kms  northeast  of  the  capital  city  Ouagadougou  near  the  village  of 
Dem  and  on  a  ferricrete  capped  ridge  to  the  west  of  the  village,  it  is  possible  to  find  a  number  of 
opencast workings and underground mines that show evidence of extensive artisanal mining for iron. 
Iron mining worked quartz-vein hosted and lateritic ore. Nearby, waste piles, processing sites and at 
least  eleven  (11)  Bloomery  furnaces  are  exposed  on  the  alluvial  plain.  Petrographically  the  ore 
bearing  rocks  consist  of  goethite-hematite  as  the  dominant  oxides  with  silica.  Geological  and 
ethnographic  studies  conducted  in  2011  focussed  on  detailing  and  mapping  the  mine  site  and  host 
rocks  (including  ore  rocks),  and  establishing  the  age  of  mining,  processing  and  forging  of  ore. 
Selected charcoal samples were collected from furnaces sites. Limited AMS radiocarbon dating of six 
(6)  samples  was  performed  at  Beta  Analytic  laboratory  in  Miami,  Florida,  USA  and  suggested  that 
iron  forging  may  have  begun  in  the  15th  century,  which  could  also  be  the  age  of  mining  and 
processing  of  ore.  The  site  has  characteristics  such  as  impure  slag,  eleven  (11)  large  furnaces, 
hundreds  of  tuyeres,  and  crucibles,  and  clay  fragments.  Remnant  slag  samples  were  collected  for 
petrographic and mineralogical study to deduce the mineral composition of the slag. The slag samples 
contained high concentration of fayalite, quartz, magnetite and hematite and low concentration of iron 
metal  and  ulvospinel  suggesting  an  iron  silicate  slag  of  low  melt  temperature  was  formed  in  the 
furnaces.  
13

--- Page 14 ---
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Nature of Artisanal Mining 
Artisanal mining is the extraction of economic minerals from the ground in the form of surface 
and underground mining, legally or illegally. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) activities are 
conducted on ore bodies or deposits by persons using traditional techniques and/or low mechanisation 
levels  (Anonymous,  1999).  Artisanal  mining  involves  extraction  and  processing  of  minerals  by 
intensive selective  manual labour.  Hilson (2002a, b) stated that in the most advanced case, ASM is 
semi-mechanised  and  utilises  slightly  advanced  processing  techniques  to  highly  rudimentary.  In 
recent years, the ASM sector has experienced significant growth worldwide, predominantly in remote 
rural areas of the developing world (Hentschel et al., 2003). Hentschel et al. (op. cit.) stated that this 
has occurred mainly in response to widespread unemployment in African, Latin-American and Asian 
countries in which ASM takes place. 
ASM is informal to formal and is an alternative and often seasonal form of income for the rural 
sector (Hein, 2007). It is highly selective mining and is linked to poverty in a complex way. ASM is 
practiced  by  millions  around  the  world  (in  2009  the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme 
estimated 10-15 million artisanal and small-scale miners globally in approximately 70 countries) and 
concerns  every  mineral  and  petroleum  resource.  ASM  communities  comprise  individuals,  families, 
groups or cooperatives (often with illegal status). ASM covers activities involving as little as two or 
three part-time miners working in a region, or tens of thousands of miners at a site working shifts to 
produce as much ore as possible (Telmer, 2006). 
ASM  in  Africa  is  typically  regulated  but  legislation  is  not  consistently  implemented  and 
controlled by the relevant authorities. However ASM communities have a complex system of internal 
checks and balances (Hein, 2007). It often involves large numbers of women and children. ASM is 
normally  associated  with  significant  to  insignificant  production  of  ore,  poor  or  low-level  mining, 
processing and extraction practices, illegal trading and access (Cameroon, 2002), conflict, corruption, 
violence,  exploitation  and  human  rights  violations  (Bower,  1987;  ICMM,  2010),  poor  health 
(HIV/AIDS,  mental  health,  prostitution,  high  mortality  and  sanitation),  poor  safety  (high  worker 
morality, child versus adult), low levels of education and skill, environmental degradation (Hentschel 
et al., 2002), pollution and regolith bioturbation, and/or an absence of security of tenure (Hein, 2007). 
Generally,  ASM  is  practiced  as  an  alternative  economic  activity  in  times  of  economic  stress 
(Hoadley and Limpitlaw, 2004). ASM in Burkina Faso, where this study is located, extracts iron for 
the production of agricultural tools, and gold and silver in exchange for money and food. Hentschel et 
al.  (2003)  divided  ASM  into  the  following  categories;  (a)  gold  rush  or  influx  (ICMM,  2010);  (b) 
temporary operations fuelled by economic recession; (c) isolated and remote operations with little or 
14

--- Page 15 ---
no  involvement  with nearby  communities;  (d)  seasonal  ASM  activities  within  an  agricultural  cycle; 
and  (e)  traditional  year-around  activities  that  are  generally  associated  with  stable  communities  (or 
‘permanent  cohabitation’  of  ICMM,  2010).  ASM  is  ultimately  maintained  by  the  demand  for  a 
commodity in question (e.g., gold, tantalum, iron, diamonds and sand). 
ASM of iron in the Sahelian-Saharan rural sector is often characterised by one man with one 
small furnace, one pump and one crucible (Figure 1.1 and Frontispiece), although increasingly ASM 
of  iron  recycles  steel.  However,  the  Dem  site  which  covers  an  area  in  access  of  2  km2  presents  a 
significant  scale  of  mining,  with  11  large  furnaces  and  hundreds  of  crucibles,  and  a  large  mining 
footprint. Importantly, the site is not modern as evidenced by small grassed fossil dunes of sand which 
cover forging sites and are presently undergoing erosion to expose aspects of the mining area. 
Figure  1.1:  Photograph  of  a  typical  modern  day  artisanal  forge  that  is  operated  by  one  man,  with  a  single 
pump  and  a  number  of  small  crucibles.  The  tuyere  is  clearly  visible.  A  goat  skin  bellows  would  have  been 
placed over the bellows hole to pump air into the tuyere. This particular working forge is on exhibition at the 
Museum of Kaya and is presented with the permission of the Museum. 
The Dem region is situated 17 km north-northwest of the town of Kaya in Burkina Faso (Figure 
1.2).  Burkina  Faso’s  rural  economy  is  dependent  on  agriculture,  and  seasonal  artisanal  small  and 
medium-scale  mining  (ASM)  for  livelihoods.  According  to  the  National  Museum  of  Burkina  Faso 
there have been no studies of ASM for iron in Burkina Faso, and there are no records of iron mining 
and processing for the Dem region. Consultations with senior elders in the village of Liligomde near 
Kaya (Figure 1.3), who were the chief blacksmiths of the Chief Naba of the Mossi people (the Chief 
Naba’s  residence  is  in  the  village  of  Boussouma,  19  km  southeast  of  Kaya),  clearly  argued  that 
mining of iron in the Dem region, or for any metal commodity, or any artisanal mining in the Dem 
region, had not occurred in the last 80 years, i.e., mining in the Dem region is not recorded in oral 
15

--- Page 16 ---
tradition of significant elders of the Mossi people. The Dem site is thus an archaeological curiosity 
and may provide a link with the historic mining history of the people of West Africa. 
Figure 1.2: Location of the study area in Burkina Faso, northeast of the capital city of Ouagadougou and 17 km 
northwest of the regional centre of Kaya. The study area is located near the village of Dem and west of the Lac 
(Lake) Dem in the Goren greenstone belt. 
16

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 1.3: Photographs of the elders of the village of Liligomde who provided the ethnographic background to 
this study (a, b, e). Their information indicated that no artisanal mining for iron had taken place at Dem in their 
lifetimes. The senior elders ranged in age from 75-104 and they were the senior blacksmiths of the Chief Naba 
of  the  Mossi  people.  Consequently,  it  can  be  reasonably  assumed  that  the  Dem  site  is  older  than  80  years. 
Artisanal mining for iron is conducted west of the village of Liligomde (c) with smelting in the village on small 
crucibles. Iron rich spongy ferricrete is used for smelting (d) which makes tools for local agricultural use. The 
elderly  gentleman  in  (e)  made  his  own  gun  from  smelting  local  iron.  Photographs  are  reproduced  with 
permission of the village elders. (f) Ethnographic data was collected by interview and data was recorded in a 
notebook  with  translations  from  Mossi  to  French  and  English  as  facilitated  by  Mr  Bamogo  Makido  of  the 
Museum of Kaya (squatting). 
17

--- Page 18 ---
Importantly, although the Museum of Kaya has a single ASM furnace on display to preserve 
the techniques  of  iron  forging,  the  museum  indicated  that  no  research has ever  been  undertaken  on 
iron  mining,  processing  and  production  anywhere  in  Burkina  Faso  and  certainly  not  in  the  Dem 
region. 
With this in mind, this study focuses on the historic mining, processing and production of iron 
ore in the Dem region of Burkina Faso. Because the history is arguably lost, the techniques are not 
known, the reasons for production are forgotten and the age of mine workings is no longer known, 
this  study  records  the  size  and  dimensions  of  the  mine  sites,  waste  sites,  orebody  and  furnaces.  It 
records the techniques used as best can be interpreted from the site. It looks at the metallurgy of the 
processed ore, and type of the ore deposit. Oral tradition has suggested that the age of iron workings 
in the Dem region may predate the time of the Mogho Naabas (i.e., Kings of the Mossi people) and 
could thus be as old as the foundation of the Mossi Empire, whose inception was in the 15th century. 
Alternatively, the Dem iron site may be associated with French industrialisation as numerous mineral 
resources were mined during the period of French colonisation in the 1800's. Regardless, this research 
attempts to recover that lost history. 
Elemental iron has atomic number of 26 and is one of the transition elements of the periodic 
table. Metallic iron is magnetic, malleable, and silvery-white in colour. Its physical properties make it 
an outstanding material for the production of tools and industrial steel. Iron is found in different forms 
including  magnetite  (Fe3O4),  hematite  (Fe2O3),  limonite  (FeO(OH).n(H2O)),  goethite  (FeO(OH)), 
and/or  siderite  (FeCO3).  Metallic  iron  was  used for  decorative  purposes  and  weapons in  prehistoric 
times  (Bahn  et  al.,  1994).  The  most  primitive  sample  is  a  cluster  of  oxidized  iron  beads  found  in 
Egypt that date from 4000 BC. 
Historically, there was virtually no use of metals in sub-Saharan Africa before 500 BC, when 
both iron and copper came into use in the savannah and forest regions of West Africa (Smith et al., 
1993). Large amounts of iron were smelted in the Nile Valley. Iron reached eastern Africa by 200 BC, 
and by 200 AD had been carried to the south by ancestors of the modern Bantu peoples, together with 
farming. However, the age of iron in the Dem region is not known and establishing its age may be 
important to the mining history and heritage of the African continent. 
1.2. Location and physiography 
The Dem study area is located in the Sanmatenga District of northeast Burkina Faso. Burkina 
Faso is a landlocked country that covers 274 300 km2 (Bierschenk, 1968) and shares its borders with 
Mali, Togo, Benin, Ghana, Niger and Côte d’Ivoire. The capital city is Ouagadougou and is located in 
the  geographic  centre  of  the  country.  The  average  daily  temperature  is  recorded  as  32°C  and  the 
average annual rainfall is less than 25 centimetres in the north and northeast (McFarland et al., 1998). 
Vegetation in Burkina Faso is predominantly sparse savannah grasslands, dry forest with occasional 
18

--- Page 19 ---
shrub  vegetation,  or  acacia  forest. The  country  has  a  subtropical  Sahelian  climate  with  two  distinct 
seasons, i.e., rainy season and dry season. 
The  dry  season  lasts  for  eight  to  nine  months  with  a  rainy  season  from  June  to  September 
(Bierschenk, 1968). Burkina Faso is characterised by low hills and alluvial plains, and is covered by 
an extensive laterite plateau which is locally mined as a source for iron ore, or for alluvial gold.  
Land use can be divided into (1) land that includes pastures, woodland, forest, built-up areas, 
barren lands and roads, and which total 82% of all land in Burkina Faso; (2) arable land that is mainly 
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest (e.g., rice, maize, wheat) and which only total 
17% of all land; and (3) permanent cultivated land that cannot be replanted after harvest (e.g. coffee, 
rubber) and which makes up 1% of all land (Bierschenk, op. cit.). Gold mining has recently become 
an  important  economic  aspect  of  development  in  Burkina  Faso,  with  gold  producing  mines  in  the 
northeast  and  southwest  at  Essakane  gold  mining  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  2013)  and  Mana  gold 
mining districts, respectively. 
1.3. Geology of the study area 
Burkina Faso lies on the West African Craton (WAC). Burkina Faso is generally characterized 
by  granitic  gneiss,  and  also  north to  northeast-trending  belts  of  metasedimentary  and  meta-volcanic 
rocks  of  the  Palaeoproterozoic  Birimian  Supergroup  (ca.  2.3  Ga)  that  are  intruded  by  trondjemite-
tonalite-granodiorite plutons (ca. 2.1 Ga). 
The Birimian Supergroup metasedimentary and metavolcanic rocks  were deformed during the 
Tangaean  Event  that  is  dated  at  2170-2130  Ma  (Hein,  2010;  Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  2013)  and 
Eburnean  Orogeny  (2130-1980  Ma)  (Feybesse,  2006;  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  They  were 
subsequently deformed during the Wabo-Tampelse Event which is currently not dated (Hein, 2010; 
Baratoux et al., 2011). The supracrustal rocks host economic concentrations of gold in quartz veins in 
shear  zones,  in  stockwork  veins  or  as  placer  gold  deposits  (Beziat  et  al.,  2008).  Other  valuable 
minerals  hosted  by  the  supracrustal  rocks  include  iron  which  is  mined  by  artisanal  processes  in 
Burkina Faso for agricultural purposes, with modern exploration for manganese, diamond, zinc, lead 
and silver being restricted to small-scale short-term mining entrepreneurs (Klemd et al., 1997; Milési 
et al., 1992). 
According to Cole et al. (2009), the geology of the WAC can be subdivided into three major 
litho-tectonic  domains  namely,  (1)  Archaean-Palaeoproterozoic  basement  making  up  the  WAC,  (2) 
NeoProterozoic  sedimentary  cover  rocks  that  are  developed  along  the  western,  northern  and 
southeastern portions of the WAC, and (3) a Cenozoic mobile belt forming small inliers in the north-
western  and  extreme  eastern  regions  of  the  WAC.  The  WAC  is  generally  characterized  by  granitic 
gneiss and north to northeast-trending greenstone belts of metamorphosed sedimentary and volcanic 
rocks. 
19

--- Page 20 ---
The  Dem  study  area  is  situated  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  (GGB)  which  comprises  meta-
volcanic  and  pyroclastic  units  that  are  interbedded  with  meta-sedimentary  rocks  (Hein  et  al.,  2004; 
2010).  Carbonaceous  manganese-rich  shale  beds  and  tholeiitic  dacitic  rocks  are  interbedded  with 
volcanic units (Kříbek et al., 2008). 
Based  on  a  reconnaissance  geological  survey  conducted  in  November-December  2010,  the 
Dem  region  consists  of  metamorphosed  basalt,  siltstone,  iron  formations  and  shale  units  that  are 
unconformably  overlain  by  a  10  m  thick  silcrete-laterite-ferricrete  duricrust.  The  Dem  mine  site  is 
hosted  in  shale  and  manganiferous  ironstone  units.  An  iron-rich  laterite-ferricrete  duricrust  formed 
during the Cretaceous and Miocene (Dequincey et al., 2006) and is a local source of iron ore. 
1.4. Project aims 
The aims of this project include:  
  To map the Dem mine site footprint, its geology and geography. 
  To identify the characteristics of the Dem ore deposit including its mineralogy and host rocks. 
  Determine  the  methods  of mining,  processing  and  production  of  iron  ore  as  reasonably  can  be 
reconstructed. 
  To establish the mineralogy and metallurgy of the slag. 
  To provide a first pass estimate of the absolute age of iron mining and the age of the furnaces. 
 To reconstruct the mining history of iron mining in the Dem region. 
1.5. Theses organisation 
This thesis is divided into text and appendices the latter containing the database on which the 
text is based. The text is subdivided into nine chapters excluding the Introduction. 
Chapter  Two  provides  a  Literature  Review  of  the  artisanal  and  small-scale  mining.  The 
Literature Review also provides an overview on the historic mining, processing and production of iron 
ore. The chapter presents an overview on the geology of laterite-ferricrete and iron ore deposits in the 
WAC. 
Chapter  Three  presents  the  Methodology  used  in  this  research;  it  also  describes  in  detail  the 
different  techniques  used  for  data  acquisition,  data  analysis,  interpretation  and  the  final  product  of 
every  stage.  Some  of  the  methods  included  GIS  evaluation,  petrography,  ore  petrology  and  dating. 
GIS evaluation involved the use CorelDraw® and GoogleEarth® for data processing and interpretation. 
This helped establish the location of mine sites, furnaces, artefacts, river profiles and contacts. 
Chapter Four describes the Mine Site at Dem, its mining footprint and the layout of the mine 
sites, processing sites, mines, and waste dumps. 
20

--- Page 21 ---
Chapter Five presents petrography and metallurgy of selected samples of host rock and slag. 
Chapter  Six  presents  the  results  of  a  pilot  radiocarbon  study  of  the  limited  absolute 
geochronology which were conducted on a selected number of furnace samples. Geochronology was 
conducted at Beta Analytic laboratory in Miami Florida USA. 
Chapter Seven Discussion, summary and interpretation. 
Chapter Eight presents conclusions. 
1.6. Conventions and acronyms 
The conventions and acronyms used in this thesis include: 
ASM - Artisanal and small-scale mining 
BIF - Banded Iron Formation 
BP - Before Present 
Ga - Billion years 
GGB - Goren Greenstone Belt 
GIS - Geographical Information System 
ICMM - International Council on Mining and Metals 
Ma - Million years 
pMC - Percent Modern Carbon 
WAC - West African Craton 
21

--- Page 22 ---
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1. Artisanal and Small-scale Mining 
Artisanal  and  Small-scale  Mining  is  the  oldest  form  of  mining  known  in  Africa  and  Europe 
(c.f., Agricola, 1556). To date, there is no internationally acceptable definition of Artisanal and Small-
scale  Mining  (ASM).  The United  Nations  uses the  volume  of  material  mined  as  a  base  criterion  to 
establish the difference between small and large-scale mining (ICMM, 2010), but summarily, artisanal 
mining  involves  mining  activities  conducted  on  ore  bodies  or  deposits  by  persons  using  traditional 
techniques  and/or  low  mechanisation  levels  (Anonymous,  1999)  using  extraction  and  processing  of 
minerals by intensive selective manual labour. ASM mostly occurs in rural areas by artisanal miners 
with inadequate (1) necessary education, (2) management skills, (3) training and (4) essential tools. 
There are a range of criteria that are generally applied to categorize ASM practices. Chaparro 
(2000)  classified  ASM  on  production,  depth  of  workings,  capital  investment,  mineral  type,  size  of 
concessions,  number  of  workers,  quantity  of  reserves,  sales  volume,  operational  continuity, 
operational  reliability,  duration  of  the  mining  cycle,  use  of  machinery  and  explosives.  In  contrast, 
Hilson  (2002b)  divided  ASM  activities  into  two  categories  that  included  (1)  high  value  mineral 
extraction  including  iron  ore,  gold,  silver,  precious  stones  and  quarry  mining,  or  (2)  the  mining  of 
industrial minerals and construction materials. In the first category, as  an example, iron ore requires 
mining, furnacing, smelting and production where the final product can be used to manufacture the 
rudimentary  tools  such  as  handpicks  and  hoes.  In  the  case  of  gold,  similar  processes  are  used  but 
chemical  reagents  are  utilized  such  as  mercury  amalgamation  or  cyanidisation  to  liberate  the  gold 
from  the  mined  ore  (Hilson,  2002a).  The  mining  of  industrial  minerals  and  construction  materials 
such as sand generally do not require any form of processing technique (although mining of quartz for 
gravel in Burkina Faso requires considerable processing and hand-crushing). 
Lovitz  (2006)  attempted  to  classify  ASM  practices  in  terms  of  modern  mining  techniques, 
markets, and productivity drivers and included categories that involved investment costs, mine output, 
labour, productivity, size of concessions, reserves and annual sales.  However, these categories were 
less significant for ASM when compared to large-scale mining, and were often difficult to quantify. In 
fact they relied on considerable amounts of qualitative data. For example, production is considerably 
less in ASM operations relative to large-scale mining operations and productivity from day to day is 
difficult  to  quantify  in  an  ASM  operation.  Regardless,  in  terms  of  ore  reserves,  ASM  is  often 
characterized by small and poorly defined reserves and thus produces small concessions. 
In  general,  artisanal operators use simple methods and processes to extract in excess of more 
than  30  different  mineral  substances  world-wide  and  there  is  a  huge  variation  in  the  amount  of 
success.  Mining  practices  vary  according  to  the  type  of  the  deposit  being  mined  and  the  location 
22

--- Page 23 ---
(Aryee et al., 2002), but the majority of ASM miners rely on manual methods of mining using simple 
equipment  such  as  shovels,  pans,  chisels,  pick-axes  and  hammers.  This  manual  aspect  of  ASM 
methodology has probably not changed for hundreds, if not thousands of years in Africa and around 
the world and is probably how iron ore was mined at Dem. 
The more sophisticated ASM miners currently purchase small, cheap, readily mobile machines 
to  speed  production,  or  use  forms  of  ventilation,  such  as  wind  assisted  plastic  ventilation  tubes  to 
bring air to depth, so that extraction can proceed to up to 60 metres or more. Torches strapped to the 
heads of the miner to aid with vision underground, plastic ropes and metal pulleys, or bucket hauling 
systems, are all modernisations, but extraction is typically manual.  
Furthermore,  ASM  mining  is  characterised  by  simple  and  sometimes  illicit  marketing 
arrangements  mainly  due  to  poor  government  policing  (Sinding,  2005;  Hoadley  and  Limpitlaw, 
2004). Funds for the allocation of proper market research are limited by low or no investment capital 
and this  encourages  effective illegal trading and smuggling (Mutemeri et al., 2002). The process of 
finding  adequate  markets  for  minerals  in  the  ASM  sector  is  also  difficult  and  may  be  disorganized 
(United Nations, 2002) and trade tends to follow along traditional or informal trade routes, or occurs 
within the same country. 
ASM sites are also associated with health, safety and environmental problems.  Lovitz (2006) 
stated that poor health and safety, and the use of environmentally destructive mining and processing 
practices  draw  criticism  to  the  sector.  The  health,  safety  and  environmental  problems  are  often 
aggravated  by  inadequate  regulatory  frameworks  governing  ASM  in  many  developing  countries, 
especially in Africa. Nonetheless, although ASM may be associated with negative impacts, it provides 
a  means  of  livelihood, jobs  and  business  opportunities  to  millions  of  people  across  the  world.  This 
includes ASM in Burkina Faso both in a modern and historic context. 
2.2. Artisanal mining, processing and production of iron 
Africa is abundantly supplied with ores of differing qualities such as iron and copper. Iron is 
found  in  nature  as  iron  ore  but  iron  oxides  are  the  most  abundant.  Iron  is  the  sixth  most  abundant 
element and metal in the universe and fourth most abundant in the Earth’s crust after O, Si, and Al at 
5% by weight (César et al., 2002). It is a key ingredient for structural material such as steel due to its 
availability, low cost and strength. Iron ore is used mainly for making pig iron and sponge iron, and 
rusts easily when combined with oxygen through the process of oxidation (Guilbert et al., 1975). 
Historically, iron was a resource that was more common than bronze and  easier as a metal to 
work  with,  much  as  the  historic  improvement  that  bronze  provided  over  copper  (Phillipson,  1975). 
However,  the  use  of  iron  was  limited  by  furnace  design  which  could  not  achieve  sufficiently  high 
enough  temperatures to  melt  iron ore  into  workable material (Cleere,  1972).  From  the  19th  century 
23

--- Page 24 ---
onwards,  furnace  design  improved  and  temperature  of  1540  ºC  could  be  achieved  which  was 
sufficient to completely melt the iron ore into a workable material (Tylecote, 1976). 
According to the radiocarbon dating results of Todd (1979) there was a rapid expansion of iron 
technology from 1400-1600 AD in West Africa but Pleiner (2000) indicated that iron workings may 
have reached West Africa as early as 1300 AD. In the southeast part of Burkina Faso and southwest of 
Niger, the Iron Age civilizations were demonstrated by the Bura culture that practiced smelting and 
forging of tools and weapons in 1200 AD (Miller et al., 1994). 
Charcoal  was  a  primary  fuel  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  for  smelting,  and  successful  smelting 
required resilient woods that would burn slowly at high temperature (Childs, 1991).  Ore preparation 
involved picking of the leanest ores followed by washing and crushing to remove the matrix and gross 
impurities  (Kense,  1983).  The  ore  was  frequently  pounded  to  concentrate  the  mineral  although  the 
nature  of  the  pounding  tools  is  generally  not  known.  Ore  was  also  roasted  to  eliminate  excess 
moisture and increase rock permeability (Avery et al., 1970). Studies by Friede et al. (1986) showed 
that the ore was sometimes made into balls that could be fed into the furnace. Fluxes were added in 
form of old slag.  
The chemistry of the slag is important to the smelting process as well as the chemistry of the 
iron  ore.  Smelting  in  Africa  depended  exclusively  on  the  Bloomery  process  (Childs,  1991).  The 
Bloomery process removes or extracts Fe from its ore, i.e., separating Fe and O in Fe2O3 to isolate Fe. 
Herbert (1993) on explaining the concept of smelting summarised that smelting requires three sources 
which  are  (1)  source  of  iron  which  is  the  iron  ore,  (2)  source  of  fuel  to  produce  high  temperatures 
which is charcoal from wood and/or coke from coal, and (3) carbon to reduce iron by combining with 
oxygen  in  iron  ore  to  form  CO2  (Figure  2.1).  The  characteristics  of  the  slag  are  dependent  on  the 
carbon  (Scott-Garrett,  1956).  In  smelting,  other  elements  are  needed  to  remove  impurities  such  as 
silica (Si). Limestone or calcium carbonate, (CaCO3) is typically added to remove silica from the iron 
ore. 
The process of removing iron from its ore is known as smelting. As described by the curator at 
the Museum of Kaya in Burkina Faso, in smelting of iron ore in artisanal iron workings, the furnace is 
loaded  with  charcoal  and  iron  ore.  Air  is  directed  into  the  furnace  from  below with  a  tuyere  (blow 
pipe). During the process, iron oxides in the ore are reduced to iron within the furnace and the reduced 
iron particles fall into a melt of slag formed near the air inlet. 
Three vital chemical reactions inside the furnace occur during smelting, (1) carbon monoxide 
(CO) that is formed by reaction of oxygen in the air and carbon present in the fuel, (2) the reduction of 
iron oxide to metallic iron, and (3) the formation of slag. In the process of smelting roasted ore, flux 
(carbonates and/or quartz), and fuel (charcoal) are required (Herbert, 1993). 
24

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 2.1: Schematic of furnace, showing temperatures and reactions during smelting (Cleere. 1981,  Figure 
6). I = Roasting zone, II = Indirect reduction zone, II = Oxidation zone, IV = Direct reduction in hearth, V = 
Slag bath and outlet. 
The chemical reaction in which carbon monoxide (CO) is formed takes place when the furnace 
is packed with crucibles and preheated by burning of grass and wood, and when air is blown into the 
furnace.  Charcoal  is  added  to  bring  the  furnace to approximately  1400  °C.  In  the  reaction,  the  heat 
oxidises carbon to CO2 through an endothermic reaction that cause the temperature to rise drastically. 
As  carbon  dioxide  is  transferred  throughout  the  furnace,  it  combines  with  the charcoal  to  form  CO 
through an endothermic reaction that reduces the temperature. 
The second chemical reaction that reduces the iron oxide to metallic iron takes place when iron 
oxides  combine  with  carbon  in  the  furnace  to  form  iron  metal,  which  is  the  main  purpose  of  iron 
smelting. The extraction process deals with the separation of Fe and O in Fe2O3 (hematite) and Fe3O4 
(magnetite), and probably goethite (FeO(OH)),  to isolate Fe for subsequent use. The iron melt then 
settles at the bottom of the furnace where it is tapped off for smithing. 
The third reaction, the formation of slag, occurs between the flux and impurities in the iron ore. 
The slag floats on top of the iron melt due to its lower density. The purpose of the flux is to assist in 
the removal of impurities. The slag is drained through a temporarily opening on the lower side of the 
furnace (Herbert, op. cit). 
25

--- Page 26 ---
The chemical reactions in the smelting process include: 
C + O2 CO2 + furnace heat (1200 ºC) 
CO2 + C  2CO + furnace heat (1200 ºC) 
3Fe2O3(s) + 3C  2Fe (iron metal) + 3CO 
Fe3O4 + 4CO  3Fe (iron metal) + 4CO2 
CO2 + C  2CO 
Fe2O3 + 3CO  2Fe (iron metal) + 3CO2 
CaCO3  CaO + CO2 
CaO + SiO2  CaSiO3 (slag) 
During  the  reducing  conditions,  iron  oxides  changes  from  hematite  to  magnetite,  from 
magnetite to wüstite (FeO) and from wüstite to metal iron (Tylecote et al., 1971, Doherty et al., 1985). 
Ulvospinel (Fe2TiO4) may also be formed by the reaction between magnetite and titanium in the host 
rocks at high temperature under reducing conditions (Verhoogen, 1962; Ivanyuk et al., 2012). 
At high temperature, any silica present in the furnace is likely to combine with some of the iron 
oxide  to  form  fayalite  (Fe2SiO4).  Fayalite  and  the  oxides  combine  to  form  slag  with  a  melting 
temperature below 1400 °C (Paynter, 2006). 
Fe3O4 + TiO2  FeTiO3 + Fe2O3 
2FeO + SiO2 Fe2SiO4 (Fayalite) 
Based on the conditions inside the furnace, the reduction of iron oxide may take place in stages within 
the slag, or independently within the individual ore particles. 
The phase relations and the thermodynamics properties have been studied by Schuhmann et al. 
(1953). The stability of the phases depends on temperature, pressure and oxygen activity (Figure 2.2). 
At  high  pressure  fayalite  transforms  to  spinels.  At  normal  pressure  fayalite  is  the  only  stable 
compound  within  the  Fe-O-SiO2  system.  The  iron-saturated  section  is  characterized  by  a  liquid 
miscibility gap, which was investigated by Greig (1937). 
26

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 2.2: A Fe-FeO–Fe2O3–SiO2 slag phase diagram at varying temperatures redrawn from Schuhmann et 
al. (1953), the temperatures is in degrees centigrade. 
2.3. Laterite-Ferricrete in the WAC 
In West Africa, the volcano-sedimentary rocks of the Birimian Supergroup contain iron (Milési 
et al., 1989; Bamba et al., 2002). These rocks are often overlain by an extensive lateritic weathering 
profile  that  provide  laterite  mantles  and  screes  to  younger  ferricrust  (Beauvais  and  Chardon,  2013; 
WAXI, 2013). Lateritization processes regulate the weathering products through extreme leaching of 
the silica and alkaline-earth elements of the bed rock, which results in a mineralogical reorganization 
of iron oxide, silica and alumina (Nahon 1991; Tardy 1993). According to Pryce et al. (2010), laterites 
result from the decomposition of rock within a dynamic leaching environment. 
Beauvais  et  al.  (2008)  stated  that  most  laterite  deposits  in  the  northeast  Burkina  Faso  were 
formed  by  long-term  meteoric  weathering.  Formation  probably  took  place  in  a  tectonically  stable, 
slowly  eroding,  tropical  environment  (Brown  et  al.,  1994;  10Be  and26Al  isotopic  depletion  ratios  of 
ferricrete)  in  the  Cretaceous  period  and  during  breakup  of  Gondwanaland,  with  reworking  of  the 
laterite  during  the  Miocene-Eocene  (Beauvais  et  al.,  2008;  Beauvais  and  Chardon,  2013;  WAXI, 
2013). Although Burkina Faso is currently in a sub-tropical to Sahelian climatic zone, geographically 
it was positioned in a tropical climatic zone during the Cretaceous when the equator was located just 
27

--- Page 28 ---
north  of  Burkina  Faso,  the  repositioning  being  the  result  of  continental  drift  and  the  slow  march 
northward of the African plate. 
According to Taylor et al. (2001), laterite is a regolith mass that is cemented by Fe-oxides, with 
composition that is characterised by SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, H2O and accessory elements, including Cr, 
V,  Zr  and  Ti.  However,  laterites  exhibit  a  vertical  zonality  of  their  characteristics  and  components 
(Blot,  2004)  but  are  typically  a  weathering  profile  consisting  of  some,  or  all  of  the  soil  profile, 
ferruginous  crust  and  bedrock.  Laterites  in  the  northeast  of  Burkina  Faso  are  similar  but  some  are 
developed from weathering of tuffaceous schist and calc-alkaline granites (Brown et al., 1994). 
In general, iron laterites are low in iron and not of economic interest (Read, 1937). However, 
laterites derived from weathering of basic or ultra-basic rocks, or host rocks that are enriched in iron, 
such as iron-rich shales and siltstones, may be sufficiently rich in iron (and/or other elements such as 
nickel) to be minable. This is the case in the Dem study area, where iron-rich laterite overlies iron-rich 
shale host rocks of the Birimian Supergroup.  
In  contrast  to  laterite,  ferricrete  is  the  iron-cemented  duricrust  that  is  formed  by  various 
processes  particularly  pedogenesis  (McFarlane,  1976).  Generally  it  overlies  the  laterite  profile  in 
Burkina  Faso  but  is  still  regarded  as  part  of  the  laterite  weathering  profile  (Schwartz,  1994).  The 
mineralogy of ferricrete is typically composed of goethite, limonite, lepicrocite, hematite in varying 
proportions,  sometimes  with  minor  amounts  of  manganese  oxides,  and  residual  base  metal  sulfides 
(Craig  and  Vaughan,  1994).  The  profile  typically  presents  indurated  strata  rich  in  kaolinite  and 
hematite (Nahon and Tardy, 1992).  
Further to this, in Burkina Faso, the general outcrop distribution of ferricrete indicates that the 
surfaces have also been eroded, redeposited and cemented several times such that the current profile is 
representative of several phases of ferricrete formation (Middleton et al., 1997). In fact, ferricrete may 
overlie  one,  or  more  of  three  gently  inclined  laterite  pediments  that  formed  as  erosional  surfaces 
between 45 Ma and 2 Ma (Beauvais et al., 2008).  
2.4. Iron ore deposits in the WAC 
The WAC hosts iron ore reserves that are hosted in large Palaeoproterozoic BIF (banded iron 
formation) deposits (>6000  mt) of iron ore in the Man and Reguibat shields (Bronner et al., 1990). 
The BIF in greenstone belts are also a local source of iron (Milési et al., 1989). 
BIF's  are  fine  bedded  chemical  sedimentary  rocks  composed  of  chert  (amorphous  silica)  and 
iron-bearing minerals with an iron content of greater than 30 wt% (USGS, 2000). BIF’s are formed in 
shallow marine conditions from iron transported to the oceans in solution (Drever, 1974), as the result 
of  free  oxygen  released  by  photosynthetic  cyanobacteria  combining  with  the  iron  in  solution, 
insoluble  iron  oxides  formed,  which  precipitated  to form  thin  layers  on  the  seafloor.  Consequently, 
BIF deposits normally occur as horizontally and vertically widespread sequences.  
28

--- Page 29 ---
Some BIF deposits are formed from metal-rich brines that are expelled at active rift zones by 
hydrothermal  activity.  This  is  case  for  the  Faléme  iron  ore  deposits  which  are  the  largest 
Palaeoproterozoic  iron  ore  deposits  in  the  WAC  (Combes,  1980;  Milési  et  al.,  1992).  They  are 
spatially associated with hydrothermal mineralisation associated with tourmalinisation, carbonisation, 
chloritisation and albitisation of the host metasedimentary and volcanic rocks (Bassot, 1997). 
Fe-Ti-V  mineralization  occurs  in  Tin  Edia  deposit  of  the  Oudalan  province  in  Burkina  Faso 
(Neyberg  et  al.,  1980).  The  Fe-Ti-V  mineralization  occurs  in  veins  which  crosscut  gabbro,  gabbro-
norite  and  norite  intrusions  as  magnetite  and  ilmenite,  with  accessory  pyrrhotite,  pentlandite  and 
arsenopyrite  (Castaing  et  al.,  2003).  Iron-titanium  ores  mostly  consist  of  titaniferous-magnetite  in 
association with ulvospinel and ilmenite. 
The  volcano-sedimentary  formation  in  the  northeast  portion  of  the  WAC  contains  stratiform 
deposits  of  iron-rich  shale,  manganese  and  manganese-iron-carbonate  deposits  particularly  in  the 
northeast  of  Burkina  Faso  at  Tambão  (Kimberly,  1989;  Beauvais  et  al.,  2008)  and  Billiata 
(Tshibubudze and Hein, 2013). Manganiferous iron ore deposits are formed by the leaching of silica, 
carbon dioxide, magnesia and minor amounts of other constituents. In addition, some manganiferous 
deposits  are  formed  by  the  local  migration  of  iron  and  manganese  that  produced  space  filling  and 
replacement  of  silica.  Manganese  iron  ore  deposits  are  formed  on  the  seafloor  and  build-up  as 
chemical sediments together with additional sedimentary or volcanic detritus (Dasgupta et al., 1999; 
Mücke, 2005 suggesting that perhaps the formation of the iron and manganese deposits is related to 
seafloor exhalite processes. 
In  the  Goren  greenstone  belt,  in  which  the  Dem  site  is  located,  Fe-rich  siltstone  shale  and 
siltstone  are  sometimes  manganiferous  and  intercalated  with  volcaniclastic  meta-greywacke,  meta-
siltstone with minor resedimented pyroclastic deposits (Peters and Hein, 2013). However, repetitious 
successions  of  Fe-rich  low  grade  metamorphosed  siltstones,  fine-grained,  carbonaceous,  Fe-rich 
exhalative and volcaniclastic units are typically intercalated with the basalt units. 
29

--- Page 30 ---
3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Introduction 
The  overall  project  carried  out  in  the  Dem  study  area  encompassed  five  aspects  including 
mapping,  sampling,  database  development,  laboratory  studies  and  analysis  of  the  results.  Once  the 
methodology was established, the next stage involved the accumulation and analysis of required data. 
In general;  
  A reconnaissance survey was undertaken to establish traverse lines. 
  Ethnographic research on historical mining, processing and production of iron ore. 
  Field  mapping  of the study  area  was  completed in November-December  2010.  At  each  station 
point, lithological data was recorded and the GPS coordinates were established (UTM; WGS 84). 
Also,  where  appropriate,  a  photographic  record  was  made  and  samples  were  collected  for 
petrographic study. An aerial photographic mosaic map of the Dem site is presented in Figure 3.1 
and a geology map of the same region is presented in Figure 3.2. Lithological data recorded in the 
field is presented in Appendix 1. 
  Sampling included; (1) lithological, (2) furnace, (3)  ore body and  (4) host rocks. The sampling 
was done at normal surface temperatures 35° to 37°C with about eight hours of day light. A list of 
samples is presented in Appendix 2. 
  Petrographic  and  mineralogical  studies:  selected  samples  of  the  lithologies,  host  rocks,  ore 
body and slag were investigated to establish the lithological type and slag characteristics. The list 
of selected samples for petrography is given in Appendix 3. 
  Carbon isotopes and AMS radiocarbon dating: A total of six carbon samples were dated using 
radiometric  and  accelerator  mass  spectrometry  (AMS)  at  Beta  Analytic  Laboratories  in  Miami, 
Florida, USA. 
3.2. Ethnographic research 
This  study  used  ethnographic  methods  and  research  as  a  first  pass  to  establish  the  history  of 
artisanal  mining  of  iron  in  the  Kaya  region,  and  specifically  the  Dem  region.  The  recording  of 
ethnographic  data  was  considered  important  to  develop  a  base  historical  perspective  and  perhaps 
constrain the age of activity at the iron artisan mine site. Interviews with significant elders (Fig 1.3) of 
the Mossi peoples where arranged with the assistance of staff from the Museum of Kaya.  
30

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 3.1: Photographic mosaic of the Dem site constructed from GoogleEarth images. Location of the town 
of Dem along the main road to Kaya is shown. Sites of Opencast (OC) mining, underground (UG) mines and 
forges/ furnaces are also presented. The mine site is wholly located east of the major ridge on an alluvial plain. 
Lac Dem is located east of the town of Dem. 
31

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 3.2: Geology and layout of the Dem site. Open cast mines 1-3 are located on the eastern side of a ridge 
of ferricrete duricrust and immediately east of ferricrete scree in Fe-Mn rich metasedimentary rocks, and adit to 
UG 1-2 underground mines is located above the open casts. Forges/Furnaces 1-11 are situated on the alluvium 
plain blow the open cast mines. Waste dumps are situated proximal to the furnace sites. 
32

--- Page 33 ---
Interviews  were  conducted  with  community  members  of  the  towns  of  Liligomde  and  Kaya, 
which are the two local centres of artisanal mining for iron and gold. No interviews were held without 
the  expressed  permission  of  the  senior  elders  of  the  villages.  Data  was  recorded  in  a  notebook; 
translations  from  Mossi  to  French  and  English  where  facilitated  by  Mr  Bamogo  Makido  of  the 
Museum of Kaya and all notes were recorded in English. 
Several consultations were specifically conducted with two groups of senior elders (ages ranged 
from 75 to 101 years of age) of the village of Liligomde near Kaya (Figure 1.3), who were the former 
chief  blacksmiths  of  the  Chief  Naba  of  the  Mossi  people.  The  results  of  the  consultations  clearly 
argued that mining of iron in the Dem region, or any significant artisanal mining in the Dem region 
for any metal commodity, had not occurred in the last 80-90 years, i.e., mining in the Dem region is 
not recorded in oral tradition of the significant elders of the Mossi people.  In fact, the consultations 
recorded that mining for iron for primarily agricultural purposes only took place at a site immediately 
west of the village of Liligomde and not at Dem. The presence of iron in the Dem region was known 
but the iron was not used for fabrication purposes.  
The Museum of Kaya also supported the ethnographic evidence and added that research has not 
been undertaken on iron mining, processing and production anywhere in Burkina Faso and certainly 
not  in  the  Dem  region.  There  was  a  record  that  research  had  been  undertaken  in  the  village  of 
Liligomde, but the results of that work does not appear in the published works or reports held by the 
Museum of Kaya. 
Interestingly,  consultations  with  the  significant  elders  about  the  history  of  iron  mining  in  the 
Kaya region quickly recounted that iron mining and working as having arrived from the north through 
the  village  of  Aribindi  in  the  Oudalan  province  (northeast  Burkina  Faso)  by  Chief  Abukonde. 
Ethnographic research also revealed that iron technology was brought to Burkina Faso by the Dogon 
people of Mali before the Mossi Kingdom was established in 1543 in Burkina Faso (Brunner-Robion 
et al., 2003). There was no  ethnographic evidence  of iron mining, processing and production  in the 
Dem region; iron mining in the Dem region took place before the senior elders became blacksmiths, 
or before 1920-1930 AD. 
3.3. Fieldwork and geological mapping 
This  research  is  based  on  one  phase  of  fieldwork.  The  fieldwork  took  place  in  November-
December  2010  over  a  period  of  17  days  and  recorded  the  geology  of  the  iron  orebody  that  was 
mined, the type and number of mines, ore dressing and processing techniques (as reasonably could be 
established) and the greater mining footprint; the results of field studies is presented in Chapter Four. 
A total of 93 rock, mine site, carbon and metallurgical samples were collected in the study area 
and  transported  to  the  University  of  Witwatersrand  Johannesburg.  Geological  surface  mapping  was 
conducted throughout the Dem study area which is located in the Goren Greenstone Belt of Burkina 
33

--- Page 34 ---
Faso (Figure 1.2). Field studies focussed on furnace sites, mine sites, waste sites and also accessible 
outcrops (see Figures 3.1, 3.2). 
Geographical  features  such  as  dry  river  profiles,  sand  dunes  and  the  geomorphology  of  the 
terrain were recorded and if necessary, traversed using a GPS (Garmin) instrument (WGS84, UTM), 
for example, the trace of the edge of dry river profiles was mapped in this way. Selected photographs 
were  also  taken  of  sample  sites  and  geographical  features.  Artefacts  were  photographed  whenever 
they were found and their GPS location recorded. All geographical and geological data were recorded 
on Excel® spread sheets for map creation using MapInfo® and Coreldraw®. Maps of furnace sites, 
establishing a photographic record, and site sampling were also completed. 
The  selected  samples  collected  in  the  field  represent  a  cross-section  of  the  iron  ore  deposit, 
mine site locations, furnace locations, and waste materials (host rock, slag and chimney). Host rock 
lithologies  were  studied  for  thickness,  orientation  and  rock  character.  Underground  mine  sampling 
was  limited  because  the  adits  and  drives  of  the  underground  mine  site  were  considered  unsafe  and 
unstable  to  access.  All  samples  were  photographed,  wrapped,  bagged  and  labelled  to  keep  in  their 
water content as of date of sampling. 
Carbon samples from chimneys and furnace materials were collected from the 11 furnaces that 
were found across the site, and their location was accurately recorded using GPS (Appendix 4). The 
furnace materials included charcoal on fragments of broken furnace bricks and samples of slag. 
All  samples  were  transported  to  the  University  of  the  Witwatersrand  Johannesburg  for 
laboratory work. At the university, the lithology samples were catalogued and sent to the School of 
Geosciences thin-section laboratory for preparation, while metallurgical and ore body samples were 
sent  to  the  SGS  Laboratory  in  Booysens  for  polished  block  preparation.  Carbon  samples  were 
packaged and shipped to the Beta Analytic laboratory in Miami, Florida, USA. 
3.4. Petrography 
A total of 59 samples were collected (Appendix 3) from sites of interest at Dem including host 
rocks,  ore  bearing  rocks  and  slag  and  petrographic  sections  were  made.  Host  rock  and  ore  bearing 
rock  samples  were  collected  from  the  mine sites.  Samples  of the  metallurgical slags  were  collected 
from  11  furnaces  and  in  the  waste  areas,  and  ore  blocks  were  made  from  eight  (8)  samples. 
Metallurgical polished blocks and rock thin-sections were studied using reflected light and transmitted 
light  microscope  under  an  Olympus  BX51  microscope  with  a  CC12  imaging  system;  the  results  of 
petrography and metallurgy are outlined in Chapter Five. 
Petrographic  studies  documented  the  mineralogy,  texture,  and  alteration  mineralogies  of  the 
host rocks.  Petrographic  data  of  the  bulk  rock  and  individual  mineral  attributes were  recorded  on a 
spread sheet before describing characteristic features of each mineral. These petrographic data were 
34

--- Page 35 ---
used to determine the main rock types in the study area, and also ore minerals that might be suitable 
for determining the grade of iron ore before and after the smelting. 
3.5. Pilot study - AMS radiocarbon dating 
The  main  aim  of  dating  the  charcoal  samples  using  limited  AMS  radiocarbon  dating  was  to 
constrain the age of forging as a proxy for artisanal mining activity at the Dem region through dating 
of forge charcoal which was assumed to have formed at the same time as mining and processing took 
place. The sampling of furnaces was undertaken as a pilot study in 2011, with a view to a focussed 
comprehensive  study  if  the  pilot  study  was  successful,  but  limited  funding  has  meant  that  a 
comprehensive study has not been possible to date. 
There  are  three  primary  carbon  isotopes  that  are  12C,  13C  and  14C.  14C  is  radioactive  whereas 
isotopes 12C and 13C are stable (Vogel et al., 1993). Radiocarbon dating is used to establish the ages of 
samples younger than 55 000 years. According to Anderson et al. (1950), the radiocarbon method is 
based on the rate of decay of the unstable carbon isotope  14C. Bowman (1990) showed that the  14C 
isotope rapidly oxidizes to form CO2, which is absorbed by all living organisms through the process 
of photosynthesis. Subsequent to death and burial of an organism, the material loses 14C as it converts 
to 14N by radioactive decay. 
Based on the studies by Taylor (1987) and Libby (1952), the method used in radiocarbon dating 
is  the  Libby-half  life  (t½)  of  5570  ±  30  years  and  assumes  that  (1)  the  14C  production  in  the 
atmosphere has been constant through time, (2) the concentration of  14C is homogeneous for all parts 
of  the  system,  (3)  the  half-life  is  accurately  known  and  (4)  there  is  only  decay  of  14C  after  the 
organism's death. All of these are the sources of errors that need to be taken into consideration when 
analysing and interpreting the 14C ages. 
Accelerator  Mass  Spectrometry  (AMS)  radiocarbon  dating  is  a  technique  that  is  based  on 
detecting and counting the amount of beta radiation emitted in a unit time by radiocarbon atoms in a 
sample of known weight (Guo et al., 2000). This technique usually provides reliable results and is also 
based  on  counting  the  relative  amount  of  radiocarbon  to  stable  carbon  isotopes  in  a  sample  with  a 
mass spectrometer (Oda et al., 2000). The technique requires very small samples (usually below one 
gram in weight) and the time necessary to measure the amount of radiocarbon in each sample is only a 
few minutes.  
For  pilot  AMS  radiocarbon  dating,  six  samples  with  a  wide  range  of  carbon  content  were 
selected  from  different  furnace  sites  in  the  Dem  study  area  including  samples  FOR02-01CAR, 
FOR05-02CAR,  FOR06-02CAR,  FOR08-01CAR,  FOR09-01CAR,  and  FOR11-01CAR.  The 
characteristics of the selected samples are presented in Table 3.1. 
35

--- Page 37 ---
Prepared samples were taken to the AMS room for AMS radiocarbon dating. The graphite was 
pressed into an aluminium (Al) target holder, or cathode, which was placed into a wheel that had 40 
positions. Forty cathode targets were loaded in a 40-position source. From the 40 cathodes, 25 of them 
were test/standard samples and the remaining ones were of graphite.  Modern  oxalic acids standards 
(OXI  and  OXII)  that  allow  the  determination  of  quality  assurance  and  radiocarbon  age  calculation 
were used. 
The wheel was placed into the ion source which is the CCM beam that blasted the carbon out of 
the cathode into the accelerator. AMS counting is performed by converting the atoms in the graphite 
sample into a beam of fast moving ions (charged atoms). The stream of the carbon ions went to the 
accelerator  being  burnt  and  separated  at  certain  places  by  the  application  of  magnetic  and  electric 
fields  and  measured  by  nuclear particle  detection  techniques. The fields  separated  12C,  13C  and  14C; 
the 14C continued through the accelerator where it was detected. Finally the filtered 14C ions enter the 
detector  where  their  velocity  and  energy  are  checked  so  that  the  number  of  14C  ions  in  the  sample 
could be counted. 
Once  the  data  was  analysed  on  the  accelerator,  the  radiocarbon  age  was  calculated.  The 
information  coming  off  the  accelerator  was  the  ratio  between  14C  to  13C.  The  conventional 
radiocarbon  age  (CRA)  before  present  (BP)  was  obtained  by  using  the  following  equation  (Stuiver 
and Polach, 1977). 
t= -8033 ln (Asn/Aon) 
where  -8033  represents  the  mean  life  time  of  14C;  Aon  is  the  activity  in  counts  per  minute  of  the 
modern  standard,  Asn  is  the  equivalent  counts  per  minute  (cpm)  for  the  sample.  ln  represents  the 
natural logarithm. The age is reported with a ± error meaning that the age can fall anywhere within 
that radiocarbon age span (Taylor, 1987). 
With  respect  to  contaminates  there  are  broadly  two  types;  natural  and  artificial.  Natural 
contaminants are introduced to the carbon containing material by the surrounding substances such as 
soil. Hogg (1992) categorised the natural contaminants into (1) carbonates, (2) plant rootlets, and (3) 
humic acids (Cresswell, 1992). 
Carbonates make the sample to appear older than its true age due to its older geological age, 
and  although  there  are  no  carbonates  in  the  Dem  area,  the  iron-rich  shales  are  carbonaceous. 
Consequently, it became imperative that CaCO3 be removed from the sample during the pre-treatment 
stage as described in Section 3.5, and as a precaution. 
Plant  rootlets  growing  in  the  material  of  interest  can  also  introduce  additional  carbon.  It  is 
possible that plants grew in the study area at some time because the Dem region grows Sahelian grass, 
but  it  should  be  noted  that  growth  fluctuates  dramatically  according  to  intensity  and  duration  of 
rainfall. In this context, humic acids may have circulated through the sample by the process known as 
37

--- Page 38 ---
adsorption and the sample may liberate a younger or older age depending on the age of growth of the 
plant material (Hogg, 1992). There are no records of vegetation growth for Burkina Faso, but rainfall 
statistics  that  would  help  to  ascertain  if  plant  growth  could  be  important  might  were  considered 
useful.  
With  respect  to  age  calculations,  the  conventional  radiocarbon  ages  of  the  selected  samples 
were  calculated  using  the  Pretoria  Calibration  Procedure  program  after  Vogel  et  al.  (1993).  The 
measured  radiocarbon  dates  are  presented  in  two  ways:  (1)  pMC,  which  refers  to  percent  Modern 
Carbon, and (2) BP, which is Before Present or 1950 AD. There are factors that influence the pMC 
while affecting the  14C activity. According to Bowman (1990), the factors include (1) contamination, 
(2)  isotopic  (13C/12C)  fractionation  or  alteration  effects,  (3)  processes  affecting  the  global 
concentration of 14C in the atmosphere, and (4) reservoir effects. These factors affect the accuracy and 
precision of radiocarbon age. 
Isotopic  fractionation  refers  to  the  variation in the  carbon isotope  ratios as a  result  of  natural 
biochemical  processes  as  a  function  of  their  atomic  mass  (Taylor,  1987).  Isotopic  fractionation  is 
important in presenting radiocarbon dates that are accurate and precise. Certain biochemical processes 
such as photosynthesis change the stability between the carbon isotopes. They favour one isotope over 
another  (Craig,  1953).  The  amount  of  isotopic  fractionation  on  the  14C/12C  ratio,  which  must  be 
measured  precisely,  is  approximately  twice  that  for  the  measured  13C/12C  ratio.  If  isotopic 
fractionation  occurs  in  natural  processes,  a  correction  can  be  made  by  measuring  the  ratio  of  the 
isotope 13C to the isotope 12C in the sample being dated (Aitken, 1990). 
It is important to measure the ratio of 13C to 12C. According to Gowlett et al. (1986), the ratio of 
13C to 12C is measured in an AMS with a low resolution. This is done by extracting a small amount of 
the  CO2  generated  during  the  combustion  and  measuring  the  13C/12C  ratio  relative  to  the  mass-
spectrometry  standard. This ratio is used later in the calculation of the radiocarbon age and error to 
correct for the nature's isotopic fractionation. The C13 concentration ratio is then expressed as. 
The  composition  of  isotopes  in  the  sample  that  were  measured  is  expressed  as  δ13C,  which 
represents  the  parts  per  thousand  difference  (‰,  per  mill)  between  the  sample  13C  content  and  the 
content  of  the  international  PDB  standard  carbonate  which  refers  to  the  Cretaceous  belemnite 
formation at Peedee in South Carolina, USA (Coplen, 1994). The carbon dating results are calculated 
after normalising the δ13C values to -25‰. 
Calibration was made using  IntCal04 after Talma and Vogel (1993) and Reimer et al (2004), 
and  the  calibrated  ages  were  calculated  using  atmospheric  calibration  curves.  The  conventional 
radiocarbon  ages  were  converted  into  Roman  calendar  years.  For  calendar  years  conversion, 
38

--- Page 39 ---
conventional radiocarbon age was applied to the calibration curve. The radiocarbon ages intercept the 
calibration  curve  at  two  different  locations.  The  calibration  database  designs  a  curve  for  the 
probability of the calibrated ages. Each curve was studied to make sure the best interval was selected, 
and the arithmetic mean was used for the 2 sigma (2σ) age interval of highest probability of 95% and 
1σ  with  68%  probability.  In  this  study  only  95%  confidence  level  is  considered  as  it  is  accurate, 
precise and reliable whereas the 1σ gives errors and means there is a 68.3% chance that the true result 
will lie within ±1σ of the experimental result, a 95.4 % within ±2σ and 99.7% within ±3σ (Bowman, 
1990). 
39

--- Page 40 ---
4. THE MINE SITE AT DEM 
4.1. Introduction 
The  mining  of  iron  ore  in  the  Dem  study  area  produced  a  limited  number  of  underground 
workings and surface open pits. These mine workings show no modern mechanised mining method of 
operating.  The  surveyed  ASM  site  covers  1.9  km  by  1.3  km.  About  four  ore  extraction  areas  and 
eleven  smelting  sites  were  located  during  field  studies  but  a  broader  study  of  the  Dem  region  is 
warranted. 
The  mining  proximal  footprint  is  characterised  by  two  underground  mine  openings  and  two 
semi-circular  open  casts  which  are  500-600  metres  in  diameter.  The  underground  mines  include 
galleries, ventilation shafts and adits. 
The  underground  mine  workings  and  opencasts  were  mined  by  selective  mining  methods, 
where  mineralised  iron-rich  fractures  and  quartz  veins  were  extracted.  The  mineralisation  generally 
comprised ore of magnetite, hematite and laterite. 
The mined ore was (apparently) transferred to a number of nearby processing sites which are 
located  within  500  m  of  the  mines.  Waste  rocks  were  dumped  next  to  both  the  surface  and 
underground mine excavations. Slag was dumped near the smelting sites (furnaces) and also close to 
the ore sources. The layout of the Dem ASM site is presented in Figures 3.1 and 3.2. 
The  host  rocks  to  the  iron  ore  deposits  included  metamorphosed  shale,  siltstone,  low  grade 
laterite-ferricrete  and  mineralised  quartz  cataclasite  veins.  At least  one  mine  site,  the  host  rock  was 
mangacrete. 
4.2. Ore body 
The Dem study area is situated in the Goren greenstone belt and hosted in rocks of the Birimian 
Supergroup (Hein et al., 2004; Hein 2010). The lithologies of the study area include metamorphosed 
basalt,  shale  and  interbedded  carbonaceous,  manganifereous,  sulphurous  and  ferruginous  shale  and 
siltstone  beds,  which  are  unconformably  overlain  by  laterite,  silicrete  and  ferricrete  duricrust,  and 
rarely as mangacrete which is Tertiary in age (Beauvais et al., 2008; WAXI , 2013). The western half 
of the study area is characterised by fine grained siltstone and shale. The eastern half of the study area 
is composed of metamorphosed basalt. The geology is unconformably overlain by deposits of orange 
aeolian sand that is interbedded with rare stream conglomerate beds. The sand and conglomerate beds 
are incised by ephemeral streams. 
The  study  area  is  crosscut  by  buck  quartz  cataclasite  veins,  which  in  the  carbonaceous, 
manganifereous, sulphurous and ferruginous shale and siltstone beds are surrounded by an alteration 
40

--- Page 41 ---
zones, veins and interlocking veinlets that are rich in iron in the form of magnetite and hematite. The 
veins  were  selectively  mined  by  gallery  methods.  Magnetite-rich  ore  is  black  in  colour  and 
dominantly  hosted  in  massive  siltstone.  It  may  present  as  stratified  ore  that  extends  over  a  strike 
length of 30-100 cm and width of 10 cm. The vein-hosted iron was a primary source of high grade 
iron ore (Figures 4.1a-d). 
Figure 4.1: Photographs of vein-hosted iron ore from adits in the underground mines of the Dem iron site. A. 
Massive  siltstone  hosting  zones  of  iron  staining.  Numerous  fine  iron-rich  veinlets  crosscut  the  host  rock.  B. 
Interlocking network of iron rich veinlets. C. Quartz vein cataclasite veins surrounded by a wide alteration zone 
of iron enriched siltstone. D. A complex zone of alteration in massive siltstone. 
Across  the  West  African  Craton,  an  extensive  laterite-ferricrete  plateau  is  locally  mined  as  a 
source for iron ore for the agricultural industry (Figure 4.2), such as near the village of Liligomde near 
Kaya).  In  the  Dem  region,  ferricrete  overlying  iron-rich  shale  was  clearly  mined  artisanally  as  a 
source  of  iron,  along  with  primary  iron  in  the  alteration  selvages  around  buck  quartz  veins  that 
crosscut the iron-rich shale. 
Laterite-ferricrete type iron ores are derived from the sub-aerial alteration of rocks (Beukes et 
al., 2002). Laterite-ferricrete ore deposits in the study area are 6-20 m thick, but usually less than 6 m, 
and  consist  of  nodular  red,  yellow  and  brown  hematite  and/or  goethite.  The  laterite  ores  are 
41

--- Page 42 ---
concentrated  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  regolith  as  a  supergene  product  of  the  iron-bearing  host 
rocks. It consists of oxidised and insoluble rock constituents. 
Figure 4.2: Laterite-ferricrete plateau and outcrops occur across the Dem region. A. Photograph of recemented 
ferricrete in the foreground with ferricrete plateau in the back ground. B. Ferricrete overlying massive siltstone 
unit in the Dem region. C. Ferricrete plateau in the background is composed of the profile in photograph D. 
Several layers of ferricrete development can be interpreted from the profile.  
In  summary,  there  are  two  types  of  ore  deposits  in  the  study  area;  vein  hosted  and  laterite-
ferricrete hosted. The range of ore types mined was extensive and varied from high grade magnetite to 
low grade laterite. 
4.3. Mines 
The  surface  mines  consist  of  two  bowl-shaped  open  cast  pits  (OC  1,  OC  2)  that  are 
approximately  500-600m in diameter, with small galleries running a short distance into the sides of 
42

--- Page 43 ---
the pit following the iron-rich vein-type ore. A third site (OC3) is situated approximately 650 metres 
south-southeast of these two opencast. OC1 is situated at UTM 695780.98 mE, 1458597.50 mN, OC2 
at UTM 695778.71, 1458705.0 mN, and OC3 at 696020.66 mE, 1457969.2 mN. Iron ore supply that 
came from these sites comprised mostly laterite ore that was at or near surface. The open cast mines 
are shown in Figure 4.3 as pit 1 and pit 2. Underground Mine 1 (UG1) is located between OC 1 and 
OC 2. OC 1 mined scree rocks that rolled down the hill from outcrops of shale-siltstone above. OC 2 
mined ferricrete scree that rolled down the hill from the ferricrete plateau above. This both in-situ and 
scree was mined at Dem. 
Figure  4.3:  The  two  surface mines  consist  of  bowl-shaped  opencast  pits  that are  approximately  500-600m  in 
diameter. The most significant is pit 1 which has worked a considerable volume of primary ore dislodged from 
outcrops above the opencast, in a natural valley. Iron rich cataclasite veins also crop out across the floor of the 
open cast. Underground workings (UG 1) occur between the two open casts with adit/entrance located high on 
a rock face (as marked). Open cast pit 2 worked mainly ferricrete scree that roll down from the laterite plateau 
above. 
The site also has two underground mines, which are characterised by drifts, galleries, adits and 
tunnels (Figure 4.4). These openings were developed along and perpendicular to the mineralised vein 
type ore. Underground mine 1 (UG1) is situated at latitude 13°11'15.137" N, longitude 1°11'36.017" 
W and is characterised by two adits that are 3m apart. The opening of each adit is 1 to 2 metres in 
diameter.  Underground  mine  2  (UG2)  is  situated  67m  SSE  of  UG1  at  latitude  13°  10'  55.107"  N, 
longitude  1°  11'  28.759"  W.  These  two  underground  mines  are  characterised  by  quartz  vein-hosted 
iron ore with magnetite and hematite hosted in shale and siltstone units. 
43

--- Page 44 ---
After the ore was extracted from the open cast and underground mines, it is likely that the ore 
was transported to the processing sites nearby the mines, with ore being dumped proximal to mining 
operation, as occurs at ASM sites around the world today. The ore might have been man-hauled to the 
surface in bags or sacks particularly because there is no evidence at the Dem site of mechanical aids 
for  hoisting  and  hauling  ore.  It  is  possible  that  the  open  cast  operations  were  mined  by  women, 
children  and  aged  persons,  as  can  be  witnessed  at  ASM  site  throughout  Burkina  Faso  and  West 
Africa, with the underground operations being the domain of men. 
Figure 4.4: Underground Mine 1 (UG1) consists of a series of drifts, galleries, adits and tunnels that accessed 
primary in-situ iron ore from the selvedge of quartz cataclasite veins. The galleries were too dangerous to enter 
but the workings were considerable. 
4.4. Ore Dressing and Processing 
After mining, the material containing the ore was  likely separated from the waste material by 
handpicking, sorting and crushing as occurs at ASM sites today and around the world, and particularly 
44

--- Page 45 ---
because there are small ore stockpiles near to the mines. The locations of stockpiles are presented in 
Appendix 2. The waste rocks included quartz, silicrete and iron-poor laterite. 
After the removal of most  of the waste rock, the ore was transferred to the forging sites. The 
means of transport is not known, but we can speculate that the ore was transported by man-labour or 
perhaps on livestock such as donkeys, as this is the technique that remains in use today in ASM sites. 
Well defined paths (which currently stand proud of the eroding land surface) lead between the mine 
sites and the forges.  
Assuming  that  the  ore  was  transported  by  man  power  in  baskets,  sacks  and  bags,  the 
transportation  from  the  sorting  site  and  ultimately  to  the  furnaces  would  have  been  across  short 
distances  as  the  processing  and  furnace  sites  are  not  far  from  the  mine  sites  (1  km).  After 
beneficiating the ore at the processing (again by hand with rudimentary tools for liberating the high 
grade  ore  from  the  waste),  the  ore  would  have  been transported  to  the  furnaces.  Stockpiles  of  high 
grade  ore  were  not  found  in  the  study  area  and  it  is  assumed  that  ore  was  passed  directly  into  the 
furnaces as needed from the processing sites. 
The  evidence  of  iron  smelting  in  the  study  area  includes  the  remains  of  at  least  11  furnace 
(furnace wall and floor fragments), and hundreds of fragments of tuyeres, crucible, burnt clay and iron 
slag (Figure 4.5). The furnaces remains are circular in shape with a maximum diameter  of 2 m. The 
furnaces  designs  were  bowl-shaped  and/or  dome-shaped,  as  interpreted  from  the  remains  at  the 
furnace sites. The bowl-shaped furnaces formed a hollow in the ground which was lined with clay and 
filled with iron ore and charcoal. The dome-shaped furnaces comprised a circular hearth that was flat 
at the base and covered by a brick dome. A list of the different types of furnaces in the study area with 
their geographic locations, are presented in Appendix 3. 
The  furnaces  were  filled  with  a  number  of  tuyeres,  fragments  of  burnt  clay  and  small  slag 
fragments.  Except  for  their  size,  both  the  bowl  and  dome  furnaces  were  the  same  in  most 
characteristics. Furnace 1 and 5 are the only processing sites that are far from the mine sites at 1.6 and 
1.7 km distance, respectively. The relationship between the individual furnaces is not known, and it is 
not clear if they worked as entities across the mine-processing sites, or together. 
Tuyere  fragments  were found  in all  the furnaces  and  sometimes  hold slag  on their  ends. The 
average tuyere size found in the study area was 7 cm long. Tuyeres are clay nozzles used to allow air 
into the furnace through forced bellows (Childs, 1989). A bellow is used to cover the furnace and is 
normally made of goat skin. The tuyere provides oxygen into the furnace and increases the pressure of 
the  furnace  temperature.  It  can  be  interpreted  that  a  bellows  system  was  used  to  allow  air  into  the 
furnaces in order to increase the temperature achieved in the furnace. 
Hundreds  of  crucibles  were  also  found  in  the  study  area  in  association  with  the  tuyeres  and 
furnaces. A crucible is a heat resistant bowl-like structure made of clay and organic material used in 
the  smelting  process.  The  source  of  the  material  used  to  make  the  tuyeres,  crucibles  and  furnace 
bricks can only be speculated; however, they are made of  orange aeolian sand similar to that which 
45

--- Page 46 ---
unconformably overlies the Birimian Supergroup and Tertiary rocks of the study area. It is interpreted 
to mean that the local sand was mined or harvested in the production of crucibles (probably made by 
hand). 
Figure 4.5: Iron smelting at the Dem site is evidenced from the remains of at least 11 furnace (furnace wall and 
floor fragments), and hundreds of fragments of tuyeres, crucible, burnt clay and iron slag. A. Burnt clay of the 
furnace wall. B. Furnace 2 which is representative of all furnace in the Dem mine site. They are typically round 
with flat or bowl shaped floors. C and D. Tuyeres are scattered around many of the furnaces or welded into the 
floor of the furnaces with slag. E and F. Crucibles made of clay-sand are also found proximal to the furnace site 
of welded together with slag. 
46

--- Page 47 ---
The waste rock in the mine sites was dumped near the open casts and underground mines. Open casts 
tend to produce more waste than underground mines where a minimal quantity of waste was removed 
to gain access to the ore deposit (Hudson et al., 1999). It is thus that the largest waste piles are located 
next to the opencast mines. 
Waste  from  the  furnaces  included  slag  and  furnace  fragments  which  were  dumped  after 
smelting and within metres of the furnaces (Figure 4.6). Processing sites were also located proximal to 
the furnace sites. 
Figure 4.6: Processing sites at the Dem site. A and B. Numerous processing and slag dump sites are located 
near  the  mines  and  adjacent  to  furnaces  and  scattered  throughout  the  area.  They  indicated  that  the  ore  was 
beneficiated before use in the furnace, or that slag was removed from the ore after smelting. C. Section through 
a slag dump site next to a furnace 8. It is clear that a significant amount of forging had taken place at Furnace 
8. 
47

--- Page 48 ---
Slag is the by-product of iron smelting.  It can be defined as a silicate complex formed in the 
process  of  Bloomery  when  iron  ore  is  being  reduced  in  a  furnace  (Friede  et  al.,  1982).  The  most 
important constituent of slag is fayalite (Fe2SiO4) and quartz (SiO2) (Morton and Wingrove 1972). 
Slag making has always been a part of steel and iron making. In 1500 BC, the secret to steel 
and  iron  making  was  in  the  slag  formulations  (Muszer,  2004).  The  characteristic  behaviour  of  slag 
under any operating conditions is a function of its composition and the various constituents in it of 
which the fluxing constituents are the most important ones. Slag contains gangue minerals from the 
ore, impurities from the fuel, wüstite, silica and a variety of reaction products formed in the smelting 
process. There are generally two types of slag including the flow-type and furnace-bottom slag. Flow-
type  slag  is  solidified  from  molten  rock,  a  condition  which  is  lava-like  and  rippled  in  appearance. 
Flow-type  slag  is  black,  dense  and  shiny  in  appearance.  In  contrast,  furnace-bottom  slag  contains 
higher amounts of impurities from the ore, fuel and bloom. It is often spongy, porous and needle-like 
in texture.  
During the process of smelting, slag floats on the surface of the molten product due to the low 
density  of  slag.  The  characteristics  of  slag  such  as  the  volume,  density,  porosity  and  grain  size  is 
influenced  by  the  cooling  rate,  temperature  and  the  chemical  composition  of  the  iron  ore,  flux, 
charcoal and clay. Higher temperatures decrease the viscosity of the melt. 
Different  types  of  slag  (Figure  4.7)  were  dumped  at  different  locations  in  the  Dem  area  and 
included (1) a dense black-grey flowing type that resulted from a slow cooling rate, (2) a black glassy 
type resembling an obsidian formed as result of a rapid cooling rate in the presence of water, (3) a 
spinifex-like texture due to quenching at high temperature, and (4) a clay containing pumice-like slag 
with vugs that formed due to the release of gas bubbles in the melt. 
Due to high silica content of the slag, it is resistant to weathering, thus large amounts of slag 
fragments  were  found  at  the  ASM  site.  Slag  waste  around  Furnace  5  was  significant  and  extended 
away from the furnaces up to 25-40 metres; it may have produced more slag and was bigger than all 
the other furnaces. 
In summary, the above evidence clearly shows that mining in the study area was important. It 
must also have been economically  viable because a considerable amount of human capital and skill 
was expended at the site. Ore dressing and processing extended over a considerable area of the study 
site. 
4.5. The greater mining footprint 
The  Dem  ASM  site  is  located  2km  west  of  the  Dem  village,  which  is  situated  at  latitude 
13°11'17.528" and longitude 1°10'43.199"W. According to Haaland et al. (2004), the successful cycle 
of historic iron smelting involved; (1) the choice of the smelting site with respect to settlement and  
48

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 4.7: Photographs of the different types of slag in found at the Dem mine site. A. Fragment of glassy slag 
resembling an obsidian found throughout the Dem site at all furnaces is consequent of rapid cooling. B. Flow 
type slag from Furnace 5 which is forms during slow cooling from a high temperature melt. C. Coarse grained 
slag from Furnace 5 formed by slow cooling  rate at a relatively  constant temperature.  D.  a dense black-grey 
flowing  type  that  resulted  from  a  slow  cooling  rate  in  cow-pat  form,  E.  Spinifex  texture  which  forms  due  to 
quenching at high temperature. F. Vesicular slag with vugs that formed due to the release of gas bubbles in the 
melt. 
49

--- Page 50 ---
resources (iron ore, charcoal, clay, water and flux), (2) the choice of trees for making charcoal and 
transporting them to the processing site, (3) clay collection for furnace construction and production of 
tuyere  and  crucibles,  and  (4)  distribution  of  the  final  product  after  smelting.  Presumably,  historic 
smelters  could  possibly  choose  the  smelting  site  near  at  least  one  resource.  Certainly,  the  iron-rich 
resources  at  Dem  gave  reason  for  the  other  industries  to  exist;  tuyere,  crucible  and  furnace  brick 
production is interpreted to have taken place locally from orange aeolian sand which covers the Dem 
study area. 
Charcoal was the most appropriate fuel for the smelting of iron ore in ancient times but the type 
of  wood  used  in  the  Dem  study  area  is  a  subject  of  speculation.  Charcoal  is  a  by-product  of  dry 
distillation  of  wood  and  contains  high  carbon  content  (Karbowniczek,  2005).  It  is  advantageous 
because it is easy to produce, has low ash content, contains no sulphur and has a high caloric value 
meaning, it can maintain very high temperatures in a small volume (Craddock, 1995). 
At Dem, an immediate source of charcoal could have been from the valleys to the east of the 
ASM  site  which  today  hosts  2  dams  for  irrigation  and  extensive  market  gardens  (Figure  3.1).  The 
vegetation at the valley is presently dominated by large trees and savannah forest. It seems possible 
that the historic Dem forest could  have provided the source of fuel (charcoal) during iron smelting, 
and perhaps a ready source of water. 
A source of flux is also important in iron ore production. Flux is used as a reducing agent that 
facilitates  the  chemical  reaction  and  separates  the  molten  metal  from  the  waste  (slag)  in  smelting. 
Some fluxes used in smelting include carbonate and quartz. In the study area a considerable amount of 
crushed  quartz  and  outcrops  of  quartz  veins  occurs  both  in  the  mine  sites  themselves,  but  also 
regionally.  A  ready  source  of  clean  carbonate  does  not  exist  although  many  of  the  siltstones  are 
carbonaceous in composition and may have acted as a flux during smelting. It is possible that quartz 
was the main flux, but further study is needed to clarify this aspect of iron ore production at Dem. 
An important aspect of the greater mining footprint of the Dem ASM site are the many tracks, 
which stand proud in the eroding fossil aeolian landscape. Tracks in desert aeolian sands are difficult 
to  eradicate  and  can  remain  for  decades  as  trace  fossils  as  evidenced  from  rehabilitation  programs 
around  the  world  which  want to  remove  tire and track  damage  in  deserts  (Burke  and  Cloete,  2004; 
Wassenaar et al., 2013). In the Dem study area, tracks are pressed into the fossil alluvial soil (that is 
currently being eroded) and these lead from mine to furnaces and processing sites, and from the east 
of  the  mine  site  region  where  the  historic  Dem  forest  is  speculated  to  have  been  situated,  to  the 
furnaces.  This  is  interpreted  as  the  representing  the  routes  or  paths  that  the  ASM  miners  used  to 
convey material between, mines, processing sites and/or perhaps from the Dem forest to the furnaces. 
Significant modern tracks for human movement and/or livestock do not occur in the study (apart from 
the main road from Kaya through the village of Dem and heading northwest). 
In addition, a number of stone tools of unknown use and origin litter the study area (Figure 4.8). 
These require investigation in any further studies of the ASM site. 
50

--- Page 51 ---
Figure 4.8: A number of stone tools (A B) litter the Dem site specifically long old tracks (C, D) which link the 
furnace sites and the mine sites, and around furnaces site. By and large, the purpose or use of these artefacts is 
not known. 
51

--- Page 52 ---
5. PETROGRAPHY OF ORE BEARING ROCKS AND SLAG 
5.1. Introduction 
Transmitted  light  petrography  was  carried  out  to  attain  a  more  precise  identification  of  the 
mineralogy  and  textures  of  the  rock  types,  ore  deposits  and  slag  comprising  the  Dem  area.  This 
section  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first  part  describes  the  petrography  of  the  rock  types 
comprising  basalt  and  metabasalt  units,  shale  units  and  silcrete  units.  It  focuses  on  the  rock  types 
comprising the different contact relations among the three units. 
The second part describes the petrographic features of the ore types comprising the hematite-
magnetite, altered quartz vein and lateritic units. The description of the ore in this study was based on 
numerous field exposures, underground openings such as adits, tunnels and winzes. The sections from 
mine  sites  samples  were from  the  deeper  parts  of  the  openings  of  the  ore  deposit  in  order  to  avoid 
weathering associated with soil forming processes. The third part details the petrography of the iron 
ore slag. It focuses on the mineralogical composition of the slag. The thin-sections of samples from 
the mine sites and contact rocks and slag were made.  
Ore  samples  from  Dem  are  dominated  by  subhedral  to  euhedral  grains  of  iron  ore  minerals, 
many of them are fractured. Sulphide minerals are less abundant than silicates and oxides. Glass and 
metallic phases are also present in the slag samples. Magnetite and hematite are abundant throughout 
the ore, ranging from the massive mesobands of interlocking grains to thin microbands and isolated 
euhedral grains. Other minerals that are also present are goethite (FeO(OH)), manganite (MnO(OH) 
and ulvospinel (Fe2TiO4). 
The main aim of all the petrological investigation is to assess the mineralogy of host rocks, ore 
body  and  slag  in  order  to  determine  the  relationship  of  iron  ore  mineralisation  before  and  after 
smelting and also to establish the texture and structure of the ore minerals in the study. 
5.2. Petrography of the host rocks 
Six  different  host  and  contact  rocks  types  were  identified  in  the  study  area  and  included 
metamorphosed  black  shale,  siltstone,  basalt-andesite  (partly  amydaloidal),  and  mangacrete,  silcrete 
and ferricrete. 
The  dominant  mineral  phases  in  the  shale  and  siltstone  host  rocks  are  unsurprisingly  quartz, 
mica  and  carbonate,  with  accessory  feldspar,  graphite  and  rarely  magnetite.  The  shale  is  laminated 
(Figure 5.1a) with minor patches and veinlets of iron oxides. Some beds are graded. Black shales are 
graphitic and carbonaceous with a mineralogical assemblage of fine-grained quartz, sericite, carbonate 
52

--- Page 53 ---
and accessory plagioclase (Figure 5.1b). The siltstone and shale units are graphitic and carbonaceous 
and sometimes manganiferous. 
The  basalt-andesite  units  in  the  Dem  study  area  are  generally  massive,  and  sometimes 
amygdaloidal.  They  are  strongly  to  weakly  altered  and  typically  chloritized.  They  are  composed  of 
fine to very fine assemblage of plagioclase, clinopyroxene (altered to chlorite), and biotite altered to 
chlorite (Figure 5.1c). Quartz and rarely carbonate fills vugs as amygdules. 
The  silicrete  units  are  composed  of  concretions  of  goethite  and  silica  surrounding  rock 
fragments, and rarely organic materials and micro-quartz (Figure 5.1d). Vugs are filled with goethite 
and quartz. 
Figure 5.1: A. Transmitted light photomicrographs of siltstone from sample LD001 SN-114. Siltstone units are 
composed of quartz (light grey) and goethite (black), with accessory epidote and sericite. B. Transmitted light 
photomicrographs  of  iron  rich  carbonaceous  shale  from  sample  LD003  SN-116.  Iron  oxides  are  made  up  of 
hematite-goethite  ±  sericite  (black).  Carbonate-quartz  makes  up  the  remainder  of  the  matrix  (white).  C. 
Transmitted light photograph of chloritized basalt (Sample LD002 SN115). The basalt is composed of chlorite 
(after  pyroxene),  sericite,  epidote  and  quartz,  with  minor  relict  plagioclase.  Opaque  minerals  are  goethite  ± 
hematite (black). D. Transmitted light photomicrograph of ferruginous silicrete (Sample LD 016, SN121). The 
silicrete is made up of nodules of goethite and chalcedonic quartz enclosing rock fragments particularly around 
pisoliths. The rock fragments are also cemented with goethite and chalcedonic quartz. 
53

--- Page 54 ---
5.3. Petrography of the ore bearing rocks 
Petrographically  the  ore  bearing  rocks  consist  of  goethite-hematite  phase  as  the  dominant 
oxides  with  silica  (Figure  5.2a).  Goethite  is  by  far  the  more  abundant  iron  oxide  phase,  and  is 
massive. Carbonaceous shale also hosts ore in the study area. 
Primary  ore  is  hosted  in  cataclasite  quartz  veins  (Figure  5.2b).  Fractures  and  micro-faults 
crosscut  the  quartz  fragments  in  an  extremely  irregular  array  (Figure  5.2b-e).  Interstitial  areas  are 
filled  with  oxide  minerals  that  make  up  the  matrix  producing  an  iron  rich  quartz  breccia.  The  iron 
oxides are dominated by hematite and/or magnetite that are replaced by spinel. Patches and veins of 
oxidised iron form part of the thin-section. 
5.4. Slag geology and petrology 
Slag is found at several furnace sites at Dem. The slag contains primary slag phases including 
oxides, silicates, sulphides and the metal phase. Common primary minerals include hematite, fayalite 
glass, and accessory wüstite, ulvospinel, quartz, iron metal, pyrite, and pyrrhotite. 
The  macroscopic texture  and  shape of the  slag  depends  on  the  cooling  rate  and  nature  of  the 
furnace  where  the  slag  solidified,  which  cannot  be  estimated  for  the  furnaces  in  the  study  area. 
However,  the  slag  types  include  Type  1,  which  is  a  dense  black  glassy  slag  with  flow  texture,  and 
Type 2, which is vesicular green-black blocky slag (Figures 5.3a, b). Type 1 slag dominates furnaces 
1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 while Type 2 dominates furnaces 8, 9, and 10. 
Type 1 slag is interpreted to have resulted from slow cooling from high temperature where gas 
was mostly released during the cooling process. Type 2 slag is interpreted to have resulted from fast 
cooling rate from a lower temperature, where gas bubbles were trapped in the cooling slag instead of 
being released. The entrapment of gas left permanent voids within the solidified slag. 
Macroscopically  slag  samples  from  furnace  1,  2,  and  5  have  comparatively  high  hematite 
content relative to furnaces 9, 10 and 11. Samples from furnace five had no vesicles; this is interpreted 
to be the result of a slow cooling rate.  
Visible pyrite occurs in samples from furnace five indicating low oxygen fugacity, or resulted 
from contamination or the feed ore into the furnace. Accessory iron metal is present in samples from 
furnace ten. 
54

--- Page 55 ---
Figure  5.2:  A.  Photomicrograph  of  Fe-rich  ore  bearing  siltstone  in  transmitted  light  (cross-polars)  which  is 
dominated by goethite-hematite (Sample LD 013, SN-118). B. Quartz cataclasite vein at the base of the valley in 
open pit  1.  Fe-rich  fractures  and  micro-faults  crosscut  the  quartz  veins and  wall  rock  indicating  they  formed 
after the quartz vein. Photomicrographs from Sample LD 013, SN-118 in transmitted (C.), transmitted crossed 
polars (D.) and reflected light of quartz cataclasite demonstrating that hematite-goethite dominates veins and 
fractures which crosscuts quartz in quartz veins (F). 
55

--- Page 56 ---
Figure 5.3: Type 1 dense black glassy slag with flow texture from Furnace 5. B. Type 2 vesicular green-black 
blocky slag from Furnace 10. 
The  common  oxide  mineral  in  slag  was  hematite,  with  accessory  wüstite  and  magnetite 
(Figures  5.4a-e).  Interlocking  crystals  of  spinifex  and  herringbone  textured  hematite  are  present  in 
samples  from  all  furnaces  (Figures  5.4a,  b,  d,  f).  The  hematite  hosts  ocelli  of  quartz  and  fayalite 
(Figure  5.4b).  Cross-shaped  wüstite  is  present  in  samples  that  host  massive  and  semplectic 
intergrowths  of  hematite  (Figure  5.4c,  e),  and  accessory  euhedral  magnetite.  Fayalite  ocelli  may 
dominate  in  some  slag  samples  (e.g.,  FOR01-03,  FOR09-03,  FOR10-10).  In  some  samples  of  slag, 
magnetite  and  hematite  have  exsolved  to  form  lamellae  of  light  grey  hematite  and  cloth-weave 
textured  ulvospinel  (Fe2TiO4)  in  replacement  of  magnetite.  The  cloth-weaved  texture  of  accessory 
ulvospinel is interpreted to be formed as a result of phase unmixing during initial melting (c.f., Spry 
1987). It occurs as extremely fine, dark isotropic exsolution in bow-tie and wispy textured crystals. 
Ocelli in the slag include fayalite glass (Fe2SiO4) and quartz (Figure 5.4b). Fayalite is formed 
by the reaction of iron oxide (FeO) and silicate gangue minerals in the ore. Fayalite is the common 
Fe-rich end-member of the olivine solid-solution series that forms at high temperature and reducing 
conditions. It is present in all samples of slag from the Dem study area. Fayalite occurs as ocelli, fills 
or lines vesicles (as amygdales) that formed from entrapped gases, and fills fractures which crosscut 
the  hematite  matrix  of  the  slag  (Figure  5.5a-c).  The  presence  of  fayalite  glass  confirms  the  rapid 
cooling or quenching of slag melt. 
Partially melted grains of quartz are also present in all samples because some  of the iron ore 
mined at Dem is hosted in quartz cataclasite veins (Figure 5.4b) and it is likely that it was difficult to 
liberate the iron ore from the quartz. Alternatively, the quartz may have been used as flux. 
Pyrite  and  Fe  metal  occurs  as  rare  inclusions  in  the  slag  samples  from  the  furnaces  (Figure 
5.5c). It also sometimes fills veins and vesicles. The presence of pyrite is interpreted to mean that the 
iron ore that entered the furnace was weakly sulphide-bearing, or contaminated with host rocks that 
were sulphide-bearing (i.e., sulphidic and ferruginous shale and siltstone). 
56

--- Page 57 ---
Figure 5.4: Photomicrographs of slag from the Dem mine site. A. Fine to coarse skeletal hematite with spinifex 
in a hematite matrix from Furnace 4. B. Herringbone textured hematite-wüstite(Wu) with ocelli of fayalite (Fa) 
and  quartz  (Qtz),  and  vesicles  (V)  in  a  hematite  matrix.  C.  Intergrown  massive  hematite  and  semplectic 
hematite. D. Beautiful skeletal structure of hematite spinifex in hematite matrix. E. Cross-formed wüstite (Wu) 
in subhedral to anhedral hematite in a hematite matrix. F. Skeletal herringbone texture hematite in a hematite 
matrix. F1, F2, F4, F5 = Furnace 1, 2, 4 or 5. 
57

--- Page 58 ---
Figure 5.5: Photomicrographs and sketch from Furnace 9 of fayalite in a hematite spinifex (A, B) and as ocelli, 
as fill or the lining of vesicles (as amygdules), and fill to fractures that crosscut the hematite matrix of the slag. 
Micro-fault,  fractures  and  hematite  veinlets crosscut the  spinifex  and  herringbone  textured  hematite 
with  micro-displacement  of  the  hematite  crystals  (Figure  5.6).  The  veinlets  are  filled  fayalite  glass. 
The infilling of fractures was a crucial late stage of the slag forming process. 
Figure  5.6:  Photomicrograph  of  micro-fault,  fractures  and  hematite  veinlets  crosscut  the  spinifex  and 
herringbone textured hematite. 
58

--- Page 59 ---
5.5. Summary 
The  major  primary  phases  in  both  the  petrography  of  the  ore  and  slag  are  the  oxides  and 
silicates  and  minor  carbonates.  Iron  metal  was  found  in  all  the  samples  from  the  study  area. 
Consequently, it can be speculated that smelters at Dem were effective as they extracted almost all the 
iron metal. Mineral phases changed in the process of smelting as a result of high temperature and by 
adding flux, which may have been silica in the form of quartz. 
The  conditions  in  the  furnace,  along  with  the  production  processes,  lead  to  the  distinctive 
composition patterns and textural variations of slag. In this study a Bloomery furnace technique was 
used with tuyeres and crucibles. The yield and volume of iron metal could not be determined. 
59

--- Page 60 ---
6. RADIOCARBON DATING PILOT STUDY 
6.1. Introduction 
As  stated  in  Chapter  3,  the  main  aim  of  dating  charcoal  samples  from  furnaces  in  the  Dem 
study area, using AMS radiocarbon dating, was to try to constrain the age of forging as a proxy for 
artisanal mining activity at the Dem mine site, with the assumption that forged charcoal formed at the 
same time as mining and processing of iron. The sampling of furnaces was undertaken as a pilot study 
in 2011 with the premise of undertaking further studies if sufficient funding could be found to mount 
a fuller study and if valuable results could be obtained. 
Six  surface  and  near  surface  charcoal  samples  were  selected  and  collected  from  11  different 
furnaces (see Figures 3.1 and 3.2). The sampling points of the charcoal samples from furnaces 2, 5, 6, 
8 and11 are shown Figures 6.1a-f. Sampling was undertaken in such a way as to have minimal impact 
on  the  furnace  structures.  Samples  were  prepared  at  the  University  of  Witwatersrand  Johannesburg 
and radiocarbon dating was performed at Beta Analytical Laboratories in Miami Florida (USA). 
The results of the six samples analysed are presented in Table 6.1 which lists the measured and 
conventional radiocarbon ages. Table 6.2 presents the results of two samples with 1σ (AD/BP) and 2σ 
(AD/BP) calibrated ages derived after Talma and Vogel (1993).  
The method of radiocarbon dating used in this study has been detailed in Section 3.5 and is not 
repeated here. However, all samples submitted for radiocarbon dating were immediately subjected to 
substantial  quality  control  measures.  They  were  cross-checked  throughout  the  process  to  maximise 
precision. The measurements of each 14C were followed by a statistical error uncertainty known as the 
1σ and 2σ. The first statistical error (1σ) indicated that there is  a 68% possibility that the true result 
may fall within 1σ. The second statistical error (2σ) showed that there is  a 95% chance that the true 
result may fall within 2σ (Bowman, 1990). 
The  conventional  ages  are  reported  together  with  the  standard  deviation  of  the  laboratory 
measurement and then doubled to obtain the 95 % probability interval. Conversion of 14C calendar age 
is  dependent  on  the  calibration  curve.  Figures  6.2  and  6.3  present  graphs  of  the  radiocarbon  and 
calibrated ages of the measured samples as reported by Beta Analytical Laboratories. The radiocarbon 
ages and errors were rounded with respect to the conventions of Stuiver and Polach (1977). 
Of significance is sample FOR06-02CAR which gave a conventional radiocarbon age of 430+/- 
30 BP or a 2σ (95% confidence) age of 1430-1480 AD, which marks a significant period of economic 
growth in the history of West Africa. 
60

--- Page 62 ---
Figure 6.1: Sampling points from different furnaces. a. Sampling points for furnace 2 from furnace walls. b.-c. 
sampling  points  for  furnace  5  from  furnace  and  tuyere  fragments.  d.  Sampling  points  for  furnace  6  from  the 
exposed stratigraphy of the furnace. e. Sampling points for furnace 8 from the exposed layers of the furnace. F. 
Sampling point for furnace 11 from the furnace walls. 
62

--- Page 63 ---
Figure  6.2:  Radiocarbon  calibration  curve  organic  material  extracted  from  Furnace  6  (Sample  FOR06 
02CAR). Radiocarbon age (BP) is plotted against calendar years (AD). White bars correspond to 68% and grey 
bars correspond to 95% confidence levels, respectively. The 95% confidence level gives an age 1438-1458 AD. 
Figure  6.3:  Radiocarbon  calibration  curve  organic  material  extracted  from  Furnace  6  (Sample  FOR08 
02CAR). Radiocarbon age (BP) is plotted against calendar years (AD). White bars correspond to 68% and grey 
bars correspond to 95% confidence levels, respectively. The 95% confidence level gives ages (1438-1458, 1651-
1600, 1756-1759, and 1949-1951) AD. 
63

--- Page 64 ---
6.2. Interpretation of the results of carbon dating 
The  conventional  radiocarbon  ages  (95%  probability)  from  the  Dem  iron  mine  site  cover  the 
Roman  calendar  ages  of  1430-1480,  1640-1680,  1740-1800  and  1940-1950  AD  Samples  FOR02-
01CAR,  FOR05-02CAR,  FOR09-01CAR,  and  FOR11-01CAR  from  furnaces  2,  5,  9  and  11, 
respectively,  gave  modern  dating  results,  which  are  0  BP,  thus  indicating  that  modern  material  had 
been  introduced  during  the  last  60  years  or  so.  Based  on  the  ethnographic  evidence  presented  in 
Section 3.2, mining, processing or forging of iron did not occur in the Dem region in the last 80 years, 
and thus these samples can reasonably be assumed to have been contaminated with  modern organic 
material and can be excluded as non-significant. 
However,  the  2σ  calibrated  ages  (95%  probability)  for  samples  FOR06-02CAR  and  FOR08-
01CAR arguably suggest that forging of iron may have been active in the Dem region at Furnace 6 at 
1430-1480 AD, and at Furnace 8 at 1640-1680 AD and 1740-1800 AD The samples were collected 
from deep in the furnace pile, with access being made easy because the sides of the furnaces had been 
breached and collapsed into a small rivulet. Consequently, the furnace stratigraphy was exposed over 
approximately  60  centimetres  of  depth  (Figures  6.1d,  e).  Furnace  6  and  8  are  situated  immediately 
east of the open cast and underground mines (Figures 3.1 and 3.2). 
Interestingly,  although  quite  limited  in  number,  the  ages  correspond  broadly  with  the  rapid 
expansion  of  iron  technology  from  1400-1600  AD  in  West  Africa  (Todd,  1979).  They  correspond 
with the rise of the Songhai Empire in the 15th century, and slavery in the 17-18th centuries and/or the 
first European exploration into West Africa. Thus the radiocarbon ages may represent historical ages 
of iron working in West Africa; a fuller investigation of the Dem site is thus needed. 
Certainly, there is currently little evidence of iron smelting for the period 1430 to 1480 AD for 
in  the  northeast  Burkina  Faso.  However,  Insol  (2000)  indicated  that  iron  technology  in  the  period 
1400-1600 AD was one of a series of fundamental social assets that assisted the growth of significant 
centralized kingdoms, particularly the Songhay Empire (under the rule of Sonni Ali) which was seated 
in  Djenne  or Timbuktu  or  Gao.  These  towns  are  respectively  situated  360  km  west,  450  km  north-
northwest and 370 km northeast of Dem across the international border of present day Burkina Faso 
and Mali. By 1500 AD the Songhay Empire extended from central Niger in the east to Senegal in the 
west,  and  from  central  Burkina  Faso  in  the  south  to  northern  Mali.  Olson  (1979)  argued  that  the 
Songhay  economy  was  a  clan  based  system  linked  to  artisanal  skill  (craft  guilds),  with  the  most 
important being metalwork, mechanics and carpentry; the regional economy was dependant on gold 
and iron. Trade in gold, iron and salt where central to the Songhai economy and fundamental to its 
power base (Masonen, 1997; Park, 2011).  
Although speculative the limited radiocarbon results for sample FOR06-02CAR may suggest a 
link between the Dem site and the demand for metal in the region during the 15th century.  
64

--- Page 65 ---
In contrast, the period 1640-1680 AD and 1740-1800 AD falls within a period in West Africa 
of economic and cultural decline (Levtzion, 1980). The decline was followed by slavery with British 
and  French  colonials  battling  for  control  over  coastal  ports.  Europeans  conflicted  over  land 
throughout  West  African  countries  and  brought  slave  trade  into  Fulani  and  Wassoulou  Empire 
(Swartz,  1980).  In  1756-1759,  from  one-  to  two-thirds  of  the  whole  population  of  the  Fulani  jihad 
states  comprised  enslaved  people.  This  period  was  followed  by  the  colonial  period  that  took  place 
from 1895-1958 and French colonials took control over West Africa.  
65

--- Page 66 ---
7. DISCUSSION 
Small scale mining of iron ore was conducted in the Dem study area as evidenced as open cast 
and  underground  mines,  waste  dumps,  processing  sites,  furnaces sites and  a relatively  large  mining 
footprint. The  ASM  miners  employed  both  surface  and  underground  methods,  which  produced two 
medium bowl-shaped surface mines (OC1 and OC2) and perhaps other smaller working such as OC3, 
and two underground mines (UG 1 and 2) with small galleries, adits and raises. 
Traditional  methods  of  processing  were  applied  and  included  handpicking,  sorting  and 
crushing, which is similar to techniques still used today in Burkina Faso on many artisanal mines. 
The host rocks mined at Dem consisted of iron-rich shale, siltstone and laterite. In the iron-rich 
shales and siltstone, mining focussed on iron-rich alteration zones about quartz veins as the primary 
ore. The ore was dominantly composed of magnetite (Fe3O4) and hematite (Fe2O3), with impurities of 
SiO2,  as  occurs  in  many  ancient  iron  and  copper  sites  that  produce  an  iron  silicate  slag  of  low 
temperature  (1200°C)  slag  (Craddock  and  Meeks,  1987).  The  magnetite-hematite  rich  veins  were 
structurally controlled in the host rocks. Lateritic ore also provided a second source of iron-rich rock 
for mining at the Dem site. 
Processing  sites  comprised  at  least  11  furnaces  that  were  dome  and  circular  in  shape.  The 
furnaces were filled with crucibles and tuyeres made of clay sand perhaps sourced  locally from the 
alluvial plain  on  which  the  furnaces are  situated  or the  Dem  Valley  which is  now  occupied  by  Lac 
Dem (Figures 3.1; 3.2). Crucibles and tuyeres litter the furnace sites as waste or are welded together 
with  slag  in  the  base  of  the  furnace  structure.  Waste  areas  are  situated  adjacent  to  most  furnaces 
suggesting a modest level of industrial activity ranging from mining or ore, processing and cleaning, 
building  of  furnaces,  making  of  crucibles  and  tuyeres,  and  processing  the  slag  after  smelting.  The 
presence of at least 11 furnaces with significant mining and processing of ore  suggests that the Dem 
site may have been an important historic iron producing region. 
A source of fuel remains speculative but the location of the mine site adjacent to the Lac Dem, 
which  historically  was  a  wooden  valley  prior  to  the  damming  of  the  lake,  may  have  meant  that  a 
source of fuel in the form of timber was readily available. In any case, timber for charcoal may have 
been  transported  to  the  site  in  the  same  way  that  timber  for  charcoal  is  transported  to  the  growing 
urban centres nearby from the forest surrounding the region (Kramer, 2002; Ouedraogo et al., 2010). 
A source of flux may have the carbonaceous rocks and quartz that form part of the host rocks of 
the region, or waste rock to the iron ore. A source of clean limestone which would make an ideal flux 
does not occur in the region according to regional maps of Hottin and Ouedraogo (1992), Hein et al. 
(2004) and Castaing et al (2003). 
The  distinguishing  behaviour  of  slag  under  any  operational  environment  is  based  on  the  slag 
composition and the range of components in it, where the flux materials and type of ore used are most 
66

--- Page 67 ---
important  (Muszer,  2000).  Based  on  the  petrographic  descriptions,  fayalite,  quartz,  magnetite  and 
hematite  were  the  dominant  minerals  in  all  slag  samples  with  minor  sulphides  and  iron  metals. 
Ulvospinel  was  identified  in  a  few  samples.  The  presence  of  fayalite  and  silica  in  all  slag  samples 
suggests  a  moderate  quality  product  was  produce  during  smelting  or  perhaps  an  iron  silicate  slag 
(Craddock  and  Meeks,  1987).  The  slag  microstructures  and  macrostructures  suggest  that  the  slag 
cooled at different rates ranging from rapid, fast to slow cooling. Fe-Ti oxide was present in the form 
of ulvospinel in slag samples. 
Iron production at the Dem site was Bloomery furnace smelting, where a fluid state of iron was 
produced. The quality of ore produced is not known as there is no iron metal artefact discovered but 
could  have  ranged  from  soft  iron  to  steel.  This  suggests  that  a  good  level  of  smelting  knowledge 
existed at the time. 
However, due to the variation of magnetite and hematite content the samples studied, it can be 
argued that smelting practices were variable from one furnace to another. Furnaces 1, 3, 4 and 5 were 
more  efficient  than  furnaces  9,  10,  due  to  the  amount  of  Fe-oxide  in  the  slag  and  the  physical 
appearance  of  the  slag.  Iron  smelting  took  place  at  different  cooling  rates  and  encompassed  slow 
cooling  rate,  fast  cooling  rate  and  rapid  cooling  rate.  The  slower  cooled  slag  exhibits  phaneritic 
texture with crystals that are large in size (c.f., Craddock and Meeks, 1987; van Oss, 2002). The fast 
cooling rate exhibits an aphanitic texture wherein the slag will have small crystals with vesicles. The 
rapid  cooling  rate  produced  a  granular  or  glassy  texture  with  very  fine  crystals  that  resemble  the 
volcanic rock obsidian (c.f., van Oss, 2002; Stewart, 2007).  
Ethnographic research indicated that ASM of iron ore from the Dem site did not take place in 
the  last  80  years  or  1932-2012.  Additionally,  the  Museum  of  Kaya  and  the  National  Museum  of 
Burkina  Faso  does  not record iron  workings  at  Dem  over  the  last  hundred  years. There  are  also  no 
other historic records of iron making at Dem. 
It can thus be reasonably interpreted that the Dem site predates modern iron making in the Kaya 
region.  Radiocarbon  dates  given  for  the  last  80  years  were  thus  discounted.  The  age  of  mining, 
processing and production is thus tentatively constrained by radiocarbon dating to have been active in 
1438-1458 AD, 1600-1651 AD, or 1756-1759 AD. 
Iron was initially forged in West Africa as early as the 6th century (Insoll, 1997; Pleiner, 2000) 
and iron smelting was practiced in the southeast of Burkina Faso by the Bura  culture whose culture 
was focused in the region 250 km southeast of Dem. Iron forging and smelting was thus known to the 
peoples of West Africa. By the 15th century, forging and smelting of iron (and gold) where central to 
the region and particularly, the Songhay economy which dominated trade in the region. It is possible 
that the limited radiocarbon results  for sample FOR06-02CAR suggest a link between the Dem site 
and the demand for metal in the region at that time, but further research is needed to reinforce this 
interpretation. The multiple ages calculated in sample (FOR08-01CAR) show that reforging occurred 
and/or that the furnace was the sample was collected might have affected by modern. 
67

--- Page 68 ---
. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
The  mining  of  iron  ore  in  the  Dem  study  area  produced  a  limited  number  of  underground 
workings  and  surface  open  pits.  These  mine  workings  show  no  modern  mechanised  mining 
methodology. 
Five ore extraction areas and eleven smelting sites were located. The evidence of iron smelting 
in the study area includes the remains of at least 11 furnaces (furnace wall and floor fragments), and 
hundreds of fragments of tuyeres, crucible, burnt clay and iron slag. 
The  underground  mine  workings  and  opencasts  were  mined  by  selective  mining  methods, 
where  mineralised  iron-rich  fractures  and  quartz  veins  were  extracted.  The  mineralisation  generally 
comprised  ore  of  magnetite,  hematite  and  laterite.  There  are  two  types  of  ore  deposits  in  the  study 
area;  vein  hosted  and  laterite-ferricrete  hosted.  The  range  of  ore  types  mined  included  high  grade 
magnetite to low grade laterite. The waste rocks included quartz, silicrete and iron-poor laterite. 
After the ore was extracted from the open cast and underground mines, it is likely that the ore 
was transported to the processing sites nearby the mines, with ore being dumped proximal to mining 
operations, as occurs at ASM sites around the world today. The ore might have been man-hauled to 
the surface in bags or sacks particularly because there is no evidence at the Dem site of mechanical 
aids for hoisting and hauling ore. It is possible that the open cast operations were mined by women, 
children  and  aged  persons,  as  can  be  witnessed  at  ASM  sites  throughout  Burkina  Faso  and  West 
Africa, with the underground operations being the domain of men. 
Different  types  of  slag  were  dumped  proximal  to  the  furnace  sites  and  included  (1)  a  dense 
black-grey flowing type that resulted from a slow cooling rate, (2) a black glassy type resembling an 
obsidian formed as result of a rapid cooling rate in the presence of water, (3) a spinifex-like texture 
due  to  quenching  at  high  temperature,  and  (4)  a  clay  containing  pumice-like  slag  with  vugs  that 
formed due to the release of gas bubbles in the melt. 
A considerable amount of clean crushed quartz and outcrops of quartz veins occurs both in the 
mine  sites  themselves,  but  also  regionally,  which  may  have  been  used  as  a  flux  in  the  smelting 
process.  A  ready  source  of  clean  carbonate  does  not  exist  although  many  of  the  siltstones  are 
carbonaceous in composition and may have acted as a flux during smelting. 
At Dem, an immediate source of charcoal could have been from the valleys to the east of the 
ASM site which today hosts dams for irrigation and extensive market gardens. 
The  dominant  mineral  phases  in  the  shale  and  siltstone  that  are  the  host  rocks  to  iron  ore  at 
Dem  are  unsurprisingly  quartz,  mica  and  carbonate,  with  accessory  feldspar,  graphite  and  rarely 
magnetite. Petrographically the ore bearing rocks consist of goethite-hematite as the dominant oxides 
with silica. 
68

--- Page 69 ---
The  macroscopic texture  and  shape of the  slag  depends  on  the  cooling  rate  and  nature  of  the 
furnace  where  the  slag  solidified.  Macroscopically  slag  samples  from  furnaces  1,  2,  and  5  have 
comparatively  high  hematite  content.  Ocelli  in  the  slag  include  fayalite  glass  (Fe2SiO4)  and  quartz. 
Micro-fault,  fractures  and hematite  veinlets crosscut the  spinifex  and  herringbone  textured  hematite 
with micro-displacement of the hematite crystals. 
A limited number of radiocarbon dates were obtained from charcoal samples collected from the 
base of Furnaces 2, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 11.  The 2σ calibrated results (95% probability) cover the Roman 
calendar  ages  of 1430-1480  AD,  1640-1680  AD  and  1740-1800  AD.  Ethnographic research  argued 
that mining of iron in the Dem region, or any significant artisanal mining in the Dem region for any 
metal  commodity,  had  not  occurred  in  the  last  80-90  years.  Although  speculative,  the  limited 
radiocarbon  results  for  sample  FOR06-02CAR  may  suggest  a  link  between  the  Dem  site  and  the 
demand  for  metal  in  the  region  during  the  15th  century,  European  expansion  in  the  17th  to  18th 
centuries. 
69

--- Page 70 ---
RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Dem ASM site should be protected and conserved as a historic and cultural monument by 
the  relevant  authorities  in  Burkina  Faso  at  state  and  provincial  levels.  The  protection  will  prevent 
degradation and destruction of the heritage and consequently will preserve the values and history of 
the  area  for  present  and  future  generations  of  Africa.  The  Dem  region  is  important  to  a  fuller 
understanding of the history and society of the Songhai Empire  – it thus adds to the archaeological 
history of the African peoples. There may be a case to motivate for World Heritage Status but further 
research in the region is necessary. 
70

--- Page 71 ---
Introduction,  Annotations  and  appendices  upon  the  development  of  Mining  Methods, 
metallurgical Processes, Geology, Mineralogy and Mining Law from the earliest times to the 16 
Century  (Translations  by  Hoover,  H.C.,  Hoover,  L.H.)  Published  for  the  translators  by  the 
Mining Magazine, Salisbury House, London, E.C., 1912, pp 389. 
Aitken, M.J., 1990. Science-based Dating in Archaeology. Harlow, England: Longman Archaeology 
Series, 226 pp. 
Anderson, E.C., Libby, F.W 1950. World-wide distribution of natural radiocarbon. Institute of nuclear 
studies, Department of chemistry, University of Chicago, 81, 6p. 
Anonymous,  1999.  Social  and  labour  issues  in  small-scale  mines.  Report  for  discussion  at  the 
Tripartite  Meeting  on  Social  and  Labour,  Issues  in  Small-Scale  Mines,  Geneva,  17-21  May 
1999. International Labour Office, Geneva. 
Aryee,  B.N.A.,  Ntibery,  B.K.,  Atorkui,  E.,  2002.  Trends  in  the  small-scale  mining  of  precious 
minerals  in  Ghana:  a  perspective  on  its  environmental  impact, Journal  of  Cleaner  Production 
11, 131-140. 
Avery, D.H., Schmidt, P., 1986. The use of preheated air in ancient and recent African iron smelting 
furnaces. Journal of Field Archaeology 13, 354-357. 
Bahn,  T.,  Gerard,  P.,  1994.  Pyrenean  History,  Archaeology,  a  very  short  introduction  and  the 
Cambridge illustrated history of Prehistoric Act, 24p. 
Bamba,  O.,  Parisot,  J-C.,  Grandin,  G.,  Beauvais,  A.,  2002.  Ferricrete  genesis  and  supergene  gold 
behaviour  in  Burkina  Faso,  West  Africa.  Geological  Society,  London,  Geochemistry: 
Exploration, Environment, Analysis 2, 3-14. 
Baratoux,  L.,  Metelka,  V.,  Naba,  S.,  Jessell,  M,  W.,  Gregoire,  M.,  Ganne,  J.,  2011.  Juvenile 
Paleoproterozoic crust evolution during the Eburnean orogeny (~2.2-2.0 Ga), western Burkina 
Faso. Precambrian Research 191, 18-45. 
Bassot,  J.P.,  1997.  Albitisations  dans  le  Pale  protérozoïque  de  I’Est  Sénégal:  relations  avec  les 
minéralisations ferrifères de la rive gauche de la Faleme. Journal of African Earth Sciences 25 
(3), 353-357. 
Beauvais,  A.,  D.  Chardon,  D.,  2013.  Modes,  tempo  and  spatial  variability  of  Cenozoic  denudation: 
The  West  African 
example.  Geochemistry,  Geophysics,  Geosystems,  14,  doi: 
10.1002/ggge.20093. 
Beauvais, A., Ruffet, G., Hénocque, O., Fabrice, C., 2008. Chemical and physical erosion rhythms of 
the West African Cenozoic morphogenesis: The 39Ar-40Ar dating of supergene K-Mn oxides: 
Journal of Geophysical Research 113, 15p. 
71

--- Page 72 ---
Beukes, N.J., Dorland, H.C., Gutzmer, J., Nedachi, M., Ohmoto, H., 2002. Tropical laterites, life on 
land, and the history of atmospheric oxygen in the Paleoproterozoic. Geology, 30, 491-494. 
Beziat, D., Dubois, M., Debat., P., Nikiema, S., Salvi, S., Tollon, F., 2008.  Gold metallogeny in the 
Birimian craton of Burkina Faso (West Africa). Journal of African Earth Sciences 50, 215-233.  
Bierschenk, W.H., 1968. Geohydrological Reconnaissance in Upper Volta. Groundwater 6, 29-40. 
Blot, A., 2004. Caracterisation des chapeaux de fer en milieu laterique cuirasse. Comptes Rendus de 
l'Académie des Sciences, 336, 1473-1480.  
Bower,  J.,  1987.  Conflicting  goals  of  mining  companies  and  host  governments,  Mineral  Resource 
Development: Geopolitics, Economics and Policy, pp. 22-50. 
Bowman, S.G.E., 1990. Radiocarbon dating; Interpreting the past. British Museum Publications, 64 p. 
Bronner,  G.,  Chauvel,  J.J.,  Triboulet,  C.,  1990.  Geochemistry  and  knowledge  of  banded  iron 
formation.  The  West  African  shield,  an  example  in  Chauvel,  J.J.,  Ancient  banded  iron 
formations, regional presentations, Theophrastus, Athens 462 pp. 
Brown, E.T., Bourlès, D.L., Colin, F., Safno, Z., Raisbeck, G.M., Yiou, F., 1994. The development of 
iron  crust  lateritic  systems  in  Burkina  Faso,  West  Africa  examined  with  in-situ-produced 
cosmogenic nuclides. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 124, 19-33. 
Brunner-Robion, C., Perret, S., Serneels, V., Dembelé, A., Huysecom, E., 2003. A thousand years of 
iron  metallurgy  on  the  Dogon  plateau  (Mali).  Department  of  Anthropology,  University  of 
Geneva,  Switzerland;  Department  of  Geosciences,  University  Fribourg,  Switzerland;  Mission 
Culturelle de Bandiagara, Mali 8p. 
Burke, A., Cloete, J., 2004. Restoring tire tracks: lessons from the southern Namib Desert. Ecological 
Restoration 22, 269-274. 
Cameroon,  Y.,  2002.  Identifying  best  practices  and  building  the  sustainable  livelihoods  of 
communities:  Seminar  on  Artisanal  and  Small-scale  mining  in  Africa,  Wardell  Armstrong 
Consulting Group, UK 13p. 
Castaing, C., Billa, M., Milési, J.P., Thiéblemont, D., Le Mentour, J., Egal, E., Donzeau, M. (BRGM) 
(coordonnateurs)  et  Guerrot,  C.,  Cocherie,  A.,  Chevremont,  P.,  Tegyey,  M.,  Itard,  Y. 
(BRGM),  Zida,  B.,  Ouedraogo,  I.,  Kote,  S., Kabore, B.E.,  Ouedraogo,  C. (BUMIGEB),  Ki, 
J.C.,  Zunino  (ANTEA),  2003.  Notice  explicative  de  la  Carte  géologique  et  miniére  du 
Burkina Faso à 1/1 000 000. 
César, A.C., Bruand, A., Ramanaidou., E.R., Gilkes, R.J., 2002. Microporosity of BIF hosted massive 
hematite ore. Iron Quadrangle, Brazil, Annals of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences 74, 113–
126. 
Chaparro, E., 2000. La llamada pequeña minería - un renovado enfoque empresarial. Serie Recursos 
Naturales e Infraestructura 9, 82 pp.  
Childs, S.T., 1989. Style, technology and iron smelting furnaces in Bantu-speaking Africa. Journal of 
Anthropological Archaeology, 10 332-359.  
72

--- Page 73 ---
Childs,  S.T.,  1991.  Style,  technology,  and  iron  furnaces  in  Bantu-speaking  Africa.  Journal  of 
Anthropological Archaeology 10, 332-359. 
Cleere, H.F., 1972. The classification of early iron-smelting furnaces. Antiquaries Journal 52, 8-23. 
Cleere,  H.F.,  1981.  The  iron  Industry  of  Roman  Britain.  Some  operating  Parameters  for  Roman 
Ironworks. Archaeological Society Occasional Paper no 1, 125p. 
Cole, G., El-Rassi, D., Couture, J.F, 2009. Technical Report on the Bomboré Gold Project in Burkina 
Faso, West Africa Orezone Gold Corporation 16, 1-132. 
Combes, A., 1980. Etude des gisements de fer de la Falémé (Sénégal): rapport sur les travaux de la 
phase de certification, BGRM 3, 75p. 
Coplen, T.B., 1994. Reporting of stable hydrogen, carbon and oxygen isotope abundances. Pure and 
Applied Chemistry 66, 273-76. 
Craddock, P.T., 1995. Early metal mining and production. Smithsonian, Edinburgh, 4, 898-905. 
Craddock, P.T., Meeks, N.D. 1987. Iron in ancient copper. Archaeometry 29, 187-204. 
Craig, H., 1953. The geochemistry of the stable carbon isotopes. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 
3, 53-92. 
Craig, J.R., Vaughan, D.J., 1994. Ore Microscopy and Ore Petrography Second Edition. Published by 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 424p. 
Cresswell, R.G., 1992. Radiocarbon Dating of Iron Artifacts. Radiocarbon 34, 898-905. 
Dasgupta, H.C., Sambasiva Rao, V.V., C. Krishna, C., 1999. Chemical environments of deposition of 
ancient iron and manganese-rich sediments and cherts. Sedimentary Geology 125, 83-98 
Dequincey, O., Chabaux, F., Leprun, J.C., Panquet, H., Clauer, N., Larque, P., 2006. Lanthanide and 
trace  elements  mobilization  in  a  lateritic  toposequence:  inferences  from  the  Kaya  laterite  in 
Burkina Faso. European Journal of Soil Science 57, 816-830. 
Doherty, R.D., Hutchings, K.M., Smith, J.D., Yörük, S., 1985. The reduction of Hematite to Wustite 
in a laboratory fluidized bed. Metallurgical Transactions B, 16B, 425-432. 
Drever,  J.I.,  1974.  Geochemical  model  for  the  origin  of  Precambrian  banded  iron  formations. 
Geological Society of America 7, 1099-1106. 
Feybesse,  J-L.,  Billa,  M.,  Guerrot,  C.,  Duguey,  E.,  Lescuyer,  J-L.,  Milesi,  J-P.,  Bouchot,  V.,  2006. 
The  paleoproterozoic  Ghanaian  province:  Geodynamic  model  and  ore  controls,  including 
regional stress modeling. Precambrian Research 149, 149-196. 
Friede,  H.M.,  Hejja,  A.A.,  Koursaris  A.  1982.  Archaeo-metallurgical  studies  of  iron  smelting  slags 
from prehistoric sites in Southern Africa. Journal of the South African Institute of Mining and 
Metallurgy 77, 224-232. 
Friede,  H.M.,  Steel,  R.H.,  1986.  Traditional  smithing  and  forging  of  South  African  Bloomery  iron. 
South African Archaeological Bulletin 41, 81-86. 
73

--- Page 74 ---
Gowlett,  J.A.J.,  1986.  Problems  in  dating  the  early  human  settlement  of  the  Americas'  in 
Archaeological results from accelerator dating. Oxford University Committee for Archaeology 
Monograph. Oxford 11, 51-59.  
Greig, R.C.H., 1937. Iron smelting in Fipa. Tanganyika Notes and Records 4, 77-8l. 
Guilbert, J.M., Charles F., 1986. The Geology of Ore Deposits. Freeman, pp. 408-411. 
Guo, Z., Liu, K., Lu, X., Ma, H., Li, K., Yuan, S., 2000. The use of AMS radiocarbon dating for Xia 
Shang  Zhou,  Chronology,  Department  of  Archaeology,  Peking  University,  Beijing  100871, 
People's Republic of China,  Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 172, 724-
731. 
Haaland, G., Haaland, R., Dea, D., 2004. Furnace and Pot: why the iron smelter is a big pot maker, a 
case study from South-western Ethiopia, 20pp. 
Hein, K.A.A., 2007. Artisanal Mining, Its Place and role in the mining sector. Women in Mining  – 
Taking Stock of the present, shaping the future. Colloquium, 8-9 November 2007, University of 
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 15p. 
Hein, K.A.A., Morel, V., Kagoné, O., Kiemde, F., Mayes, K., 2004. Birimian lithological succession 
and structural evolution in the Goren segment of the Boromo-Goren Greenstone Belt, Burkina 
Faso. Journal of African Earth Sciences 39, 1-23. 
Hentschel, T., Hruschka, F., Priester, M., 2002. Global Report on Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining. 
Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development 70, 64p. 
Hentschel,  T.,  Hruschka,  F.,  Priester,  M.,  2003.  Artisanal  and  small-scale  mining:  challenges  and 
opportunities. International Institute for Environment and Development, London 94p. 
Herbet, E., 1993. Iron gender and power, Indiana University. Precious metals of the age of expansion: 
Papers of the 14th International Congress of the Historical Sciences 123p. 
Hilson,  G.,  2002a.  The  environmental  impact  of  small-Scale  gold  mining  in  Ghana:  identifying 
problems and possible solutions. The Geographical Journal 168, 57-72. 
Hilson,  G.,  2002b.  Small-Scale  mining  and  its  socio-economic  impact  in  developing  countries. 
Natural Resource Forum 26, 3–13. 
Hoadley,  M.,  Limpitlaw,  D.,  2004.  The  artisanal  and  small-Scale  mining  sector  and  sustainable 
livelihoods.  In:  Mintek  Small  Scale  Mining  Conference,  Book  of  Proceedings,  2004,  9 
September, NASREC, Johannesburg 9p. 
Hogg,  A.G.,  1992.  Assessment  of  0.3  ml  minivials  for  radiocarbon  dating  by  liquid  scintillation 
counting of benzene. Radiocarbon 34, 389-393. 
Hottin,  G.,  Ouedraogo,  O.F.,  1992.  Carte  Géologique  du  Burkina  Faso  (2nd  Edition).  Bureau  de 
Recherches Géologiques et Minières, Burkina Faso. 
Hudson,  T.L.,  Fox,  F.D.,  Plumlee,  G.S.,  1999.  Metals,  mining  and  the  environment,  AGI 
environmental awareness series, 368p. 
74

--- Page 75 ---
ICMM, 2010. Working Together – How large-scale mining can engage with artisanal and small-Scale 
miners, international finance forum, World Bank, 108p. 
Insoll, T., 1997. Iron age Gao: an archaeological contribution. The Journal of African History 38, 1-
30. 
Ivanyuk,  G.Y.,  Korchak,  Y.A.,  Pakhomovsky,  Y.A.,  Menshikov,  Y.P.,  Yakovenchuk,  V,N.,  2012. 
Ulvöspinel  from  xenoliths  of  contact  altered  volcanic  and  volcanosedimentary  rocks  in 
Nepheline  Syenites  of  the  Khibiny  and  Lovozero  Plutons.  Minerals  and  parageneses  of 
minerals. Geology of Ore Deposits 54, 575-579. 
Journal of African Earth Sciences 41,  407-436. 
Karbowniczek,  M.,  2005.  Metallurgical  process  in  ancient  shaft  furnace,  theoretical  consideration, 
Association of Metallurgical Engineers of Serbia 5, 145-155. 
Kense,  J.F.,1983.  Traditional  African  iron  workings,  African  occasional  papers,  Department  of 
archaeology, University of Calgary 25p. 
Kimberly, M.M., 1989. Exhalative origins of iron formations. Ore Geology Reviews 5, 5-145. 
Klemd, R., Hirdes, W., 1997. Origin of an unusual fluid composition in early Proterozoic palaeoplacer 
and lode-gold deposits in Birimian greenstone terranes of West Africa. South African Journal 
of Geology 100, 405-414. 
Krämer P., 2002. The Fuel Wood Crisis in Burkina Faso, Solar Cooker as an Alternative. Solar cooker 
archive. Ouagadougou: Burkina Faso. 
Kribek,  B.,  Syrokorova,  I.,  Machovic,  V.,  Laufek,  F.,  2008.  Graphitization  of  organic  matter  and 
fluid-deposited  graphite  in  Palaeoproterozoic  (Birimian)  black  shales  of  the  Kaya-Goren 
greenstone belt (Burkina Faso, West Africa). Journal of Metamorphic Geology 26, 937-958. 
Levtzion, N., 1980. Ancient Ghana and Mali. Published by Holmes and Meier Publishing, London, pp 
42. 
Libby. W.F., 1952. Radiocarbon dating, Chicago (2nd Edition). Chicago press, Chicago III, 124p.  
Lovitz,  B.A.,  2006.  Scales  responsible  for  gold  mining:  Overcoming  barriers  to  cleaner  artisanal 
mining in Southern Ecuador. The Faculty of the Graduate College of the University of Vermont 
111p. 
Manning,  M.  P.,  Reid,  R.  C.,  1977.  C-H-0  Systems  in  the  Presence  of  an  Iron  Catalyst,  Industrial 
Engineering Chemistry and Process Design Development 16, 23p. 
Masonen,  P.,  1997.  Trans-Saharan  Trade  and  the  West  African  Discovery  of  the  Mediterranean.  In 
M'hammad  Sabour  and  Knut  S.  Vikør  (Eds),  Ethnic  Encounter  and  Culture  Change.  Papers 
from the Third Nordic Conference on Middle Eastern Studies, Bergen 1997, Nordic Research 
on the Middle East 3, 116-142. 
McFarland,  D.M.,  Lawrence,  A.R.,  1998.  Historical  Dictionary  of  Burkina  Faso,  2nd  Edition. 
Lanham, Scarecrow Press 360, pp 205-211. 
McFarlane, M.J., 1976. Laterite and landscape, London, Academic press, 15p.  
75

--- Page 76 ---
Middleton, R., Hein, K.A.A., 1997. An assessment of gold prospectivity in the Pissila region, Burkina 
Faso, West Africa, Sanmantenga Joint Venture, report no: PROGEN 1, 24p. 
Milési,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  Dommanget,  A.,  Ouedraogo,  M.F.,  Marcoux,  E.,  Prost,  A., 
Vinchon, Ch., Sylvain, J.P., Johan, V., Tegyey, M., Calvez, J.Y., Lagny, P., 1989. West African 
gold  deposits,  in  their  lower  Proterozoic  lithostructural  setting.  Chronique  de  la  Recherché 
Minière 497, 3-98. 
Milési,  J.P.,  Ledru,  P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Dommanget,  A.,  Marcoux,  E.,  1992.  Early  Proterozoic  ore 
deposits  and  tectonics  of  the  Birimian  orogenic  belt,  West  Africa.  Precambrian  Research  58, 
305-344. 
Miller,  D.E.,  Van  Der  Merwe,  N.J.,  1994.  Early  Metal  Working  in  Sub  Saharan  Africa.  Journal  of 
African History 35, 1-36. 
Morton, G.R., Wingrove, J. 1972. Constitution of Bloomery slags, Part 11. Iron and Steel Institute 21, 
478-488. 
Mücke,  A.,  2005.  The  Nigerian  manganese-rich  iron-formations  and  their  host  rocks—from 
sedimentation to metamorphism. 
Muszer, A., 2000. An outline of ore microscopy. University of Wroclaw, Poland, 233p. 
Muszer,  A.,  2004.  Mineralogical  characteristics  of  metallurgical  dust  in  the  vicinity  of  Głogów. 
Problems of mineral processes 38, 329-340. 
Mutemeri  N.,  Petersen,  F.W.,  2002.  Small-scale  mining  in  South  Africa:  past,  present  and  future. 
Natural Resources Forum 26, 286-292.  
Nahon  DB,  Tardy  Y  (1992)  The  ferruginous  laterites.  In:  Butt  CRM,  Zeegers  H  (eds),  Regolith 
exploration  geochemistry  in  tropical  and  subtropical  terrains.  Handbook  of  Exploration 
Geochemistry 4, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 41-55. 
Nahon,  D.,  1991.  Introduction to the  Petrology  of  Soils  and  Chemical  Weathering.  John  Wiley  and 
Sons, New York. 313p. 
Neyberg, H., Ladaron, D., Martin, H., Verkaeren, J., 1980. The vanadiferous  -magnetite deposits of 
the Oursi region, Upper Volta. Economic Geology 7, 1042-1052.  
Olson,  J.S.,  1979.  The  ethnic  dimension  in  American  History,  1st  Edition.  Published  by  St  Marins 
press, 440p. 
Ouedraogo,  I.,  Tigabu,  M.,  Savadogo,  P.,  Compaore,  Oden,  P.C.,  Ouadba,  J.M.,  2010.  Land  cover 
change  and  its  relation  with  population  dynamics  in  Burkina  Faso,  West  Africa.  Land 
degradation and Development 21, 453-462. 
Park,  D.P.,  2011.  Climate  Change,  Human  Response  and  the  Origins  of  Urbanism  at  Timbuktu. 
Doctoral Thesis, Yale University, Department of Anthropology, 577p. 
Paynter, S. 2006. Regional Variation in Bloomery Smelting Slag of the Iron Age and Romano-British 
Periods. Archaeometry 48, 271-292. 
76

--- Page 77 ---
Peters, L.F.H., Hein, K.A.A., 2013. Volcanic facies and preliminary geochemical observations of the 
Goren greenstone belt, Burkina Faso. EGU General Assembly 2013, 7-12 April 2013 Vienna, 
Austria. 
Phillipson, D.W., 1975. The chronology of the Iron Age in Bantu Africa; Journal of African history 
16, 321-42.  
Pleiner, R., 2000. Iron in archaeology: the European Bloomery smelters. Published by Archeologicky 
Ustav AV CR, Prague, ISBN 80-86124-26-6. 
Pryce, T.O., Natapintu, S., 2010. Smelting Iron from Laterite: Technical Possibility or Ethnographic 
Aberration? University of Hawaii Press. Asian Perspectives 48, 16p. 
Read, T. T., 1937. Iron and steel in the Far East. Far Eastern Survey 6, 145-147. 
Reimer,  P.J.,  Baillie,  M.G.L.,  Bard,  E.,  Bayliss  A,  Beck,  J.W.,  Bertrand,  C.J.H.,  Blackwell,  P.G., 
Buck, C.E., Burr, G.S., Cutler, K.B., Damon, P.E., Edwards, R.L., Fairbanks, R.G, Friedrich, 
M.,  Guilderson,  T.P.,  Hogg,  A.G.,  Hughen,  K.A.,  Kromer,  B.,  McCormac,  G.,  Manning,  S., 
Bronk Ramsey, C., Reimer, R.W., Remmele, S., Southon, J.R., Stuiver, M.,Talamo, S., Taylor, 
F.W.,  van  der  Plicht,  J.,  Weyhenmeyer,  C.E.,  2004.  IntCal04  atmospheric  radiocarbon  age 
calibration, 26–0 cal kyr BP. Radiocarbon, 46, 1059-1086. 
Schuhmann R., Powell, R.J., Michal E.J.,1953. Constitution of FeO-Fe203-SiO2 system at slag making 
temperatures. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions 197, 1097-1l04. 
Schwartz, T., 1994. Ferricrete formation and relief inversion. An example from central Sudan, Catena 
21, 257-268. 
Scott-Garrett,  1956).  Romano-British  Sites  at  Chestnuts  Hill  and  Popes  Hill,  Forest  of  Dean. 
Transactions of the Bristol Gloucestershire Archaeological Society 75, 199-202. 
Sinding.  K.,  2005.  The  dynamics  of  artisanal  and  small-scale  mining  reform.  Natural  Resources 
Forum 29, 243-252. 
Smith, P., Timothy, G., 1993. Iron and steel industry. Editor, Steel times and Steeltimes Interval, 45p. 
Spry, P.G., 1987. The chemistry and origin of zincain spinel associated with the Aggeneys Cu-Pb-Zn-
Ag deposits, Namaqualand, South Africa. Mineralium Deposita, 22, 262-268. 
Stewart, L.J., 2007. Quench textures, lithification, and modes of crystallization in a cooled slag block 
from  a  smelter  at  Northport,  northeastern  Washington  State.  2007  GSA  Denver  Annual 
Meeting (28–31 October 2007), Paper No. 143-48  
Stuiver, M., Polach, H.A., 1977. Reporting of 14C data. Radiocarbon 19, 355-363. 
Stuiver,  M.,  Reimer,  P.J,  Braziunas,  T.F.,  1998.  High-precision  radiocarbon  age  calibration  for 
terrestrial and marine samples. Radiocarbon 40, 1127-1151. 
Swartz, B.K., 1980. The status of Guinea Coast paleoarchaeological knowledge as seen from Legon 
15, 37-40. 
Talma, A.S., Vogel, J.C., 1993. A simplified approach to calibrating C14 dates. Radiocarbon 35, 317-
322. 
77

--- Page 78 ---
Tardy, Y., 1993, Pétrologie des latérites et des sols tropicaux. Paris, Masson, 461p. 
Taylor,  G.,  Eggleton,  R.A.,  2001.  Regolith  geology  and  geomorphology.  Providing  fundamental 
discussion of regolith properties and chemistry. John Wiley and Sons, 384p. 
Taylor,  R.  1987,  Radiocarbon  Dating:  An  Archaeological  Perspective,  Academic  Press,  New  York 
14p. 
Telmer, K., Costa, M., Agelica, R., Araujo, E., Maurice, Y., 2006. The Source and Fate of sediment 
and mercury in the Tapajos River, Para, Brazilian Amazon: Ground and Space Based Evidence. 
Journal of Environmental Management 81, pp. 101-13. 
Tshibubudze,  A.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  2013.  Structural  setting  of  gold  deposits  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol 
volcano-sedimentary  belt  east  of  the  Markoye  Shear  Zone,  West  African  craton.  Journal  of 
African Earth Sciences 80, 31-47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2012.11.010 
Tylecote,  R.F.,  1965.  Iron  smelting  in  pre-industrial  communities.  Journal  of  the  Iron  and  Steel 
Institute 203, 340-348. 
Tylecote, R.F., Austin, J.N., and Wraith, A.E., 1971. The mechanism of the Bloomery process in shaft 
furnaces. Journal of the Iron and Steel Institute 209, 342-63. 
United  Nations,  2002,  Compendium  on  best  practices  in  Small-Scale  Mining  in  Africa.  Economic 
Commission for Africa. 
USGS., 2000. Mineral commodity summaries. United States Geological Survey Reston, 199 p.  
Van Oss, H.G., 2002. Slag - Iron and Steel. U.S. Geological Survey Minerals Yearbook 2002, 70.1-
70.6. 
Verhoogen,  J.,  1962.  Oxidation  of  iron-titanium  oxides  in  igneous  rocks.  University  of  California, 
Berkeley. The Journal of Geology 70, 168-181. 
Vogel, J.C.,  Fuls.  A.,Visser.,  E,  1993.  Pretoria  calibration  for  short  lived  samples.  Radiocarbon  35, 
73-85. 
Wassenaar,  T.D.,  Henschel,  J.R.,  Pfaffenthaler,  M.M.,  Mutota,  E.N.,  Seely,  M.K.,  Pallett,  J.  2012. 
Ensuring  the future  of  the Namib’s  biodiversity:  Ecological  restoration as a  key  management 
response to a mining boom. Journal of Arid Environments 93, 126-135. 
WAXI, 2013. Confidential final report to the AMIRA sponsors of WAXI phase II, Theme 3 Surface 
processes, p 594 
78
