
--- Page 2 ---
ii

--- Page 3 ---
A vous Maman, Papa, Manon, Arthur 
“Happiness is only real when shared” 
(Christopher Johnson McCandless, Into the wild) 
iii

--- Page 4 ---
iv

--- Page 5 ---
Abstract 
The  Paleoproterozoic  belts  of  West  Africa  are  the  fastest-growing  gold 
production 
in 
the  world.  The  Kédougou-Kénieba 
inlier  (KKI)  represents 
the 
westernmost  exposure  of  Paleoproterozoic  crust  in  the  West  African  Craton,  with 
outcrops in western Mali and eastern Senegal. The KKI is an emerging world-class gold 
province (>40 Moz, cumulative past production and resources), threatening the premier 
position of Ghana in West African gold production. The inlier hosts a number of world-
class  gold  mining  districts  that  are  located  along  regional-scale  shear  zones.  Recent 
discoveries  in  the  inlier  have  triggered  a  real  need  for  understanding  the  controls  on 
gold  mineral  system  location  and  ore  shoot  geometry  in  order  to  improve  Brownfield 
and  Greenfield  exploration  strategies.  Through  a  multiscale  and  multidisciplinary 
approach  including  structural  geology,  petrography,  geochemistry  and  geochronology, 
this  work  presents  the  first  integrated  study  of  gold  mineralisation  in  the  world-class 
Sadiola-Yatela district. 
Deposit-scale investigations indicate that gold deposits of the Sadiola-Yatela district are 
primarily  hosted  by 
impure  metacarbonates  and, 
to  a 
lesser  extent,  detrital 
metasedimentary  rocks  (e.g.,  wacke,  arenite,  siltstone,  and  argillite)  and  Eburnean 
granitoids.  The  presence  of  carbonate  host  rocks  is  very  rare  compared  to  gold 
mineralisation in typical granite-greenstone belts of the West African Craton. Country 
rocks  have  undergone  polycyclic  deformation,  which  included  early  fold-and-thrust 
tectonics  (D1,  D2)  followed  by 
transcurrent 
tectonics  accommodating  oblique 
convergence (D3, D4). The gold deposits of the district share a similar structural setting 
and gold relative timing. 
District-scale work indicates that orogenic gold mineralisation occured during D3, after 
the cessation of region-wide compressional deformation. Hydrothermal fluid circulation 
was  coeval  with  sinistral  displacement  along  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and  local 
steep NNE-trending shears connected to structural traps in the Kofi basin. The D2 and 
D3  events  represent  a  transpressional  deformation  continuum  that  was  associated  with 
voluminous calc-alkaline magmatism. This deformation continuum marks the principal 
imprint  of  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (ca.  2115-2060  Ma)  in  the  district.  Eburnean 
granitoids exposed in the district display a temporal evolution from ca. 2115-2080 Ma 
v

--- Page 6 ---
metaluminous  plutons  (e.g.,  diorite,  hornblende-biotite-granodiorite)  to  ca  2080-2060 
Ma peraluminous biotite-monzogranites.  
The  tectonic,  magmatic,  metamorphic  and  hydrothermal  alteration  history  of  the  gold 
deposits in the district is comparable to that of other world-class orogenic gold deposits 
in the KKI. Despite the commonalities, gold mineralisation in the Sadiola-Yatela district 
exhibits  three  distinct  styles  defined  on  the  basis  of  contrasted  ore  and  alteration 
paragenesis. The  three gold mineralisation styles  are typified by  the Sadiola Hill-style 
Au-As-Sb  mineralisation,  the  Alamoutala-style  Au-Cu  mineralisation,  and  the  Yatela-
style  auriferous  residuum.  The  metal  enrichment  association  and  geothermometric 
estimates from ore and alteration paragenesis at Sadiola Hill are compatible with those 
of mesozonal Au-As-Te (6-12 km, 300°-475°C) to near-epizonal Au-Sb (≤6 km, 150°-
300°C)  orogenic  gold  deposits  worldwide.  The  Alamoutala  deposit  represents  two 
distinct  hydrothermal  systems  in  which  a  magnetite-bearing  skarn  developed  locally 
surrounding  syn-kinematic  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  stocks,  and  was  overprinted  by 
district-wide orogenic gold mineralisation. The Yatela gold deposit formed by residual 
and  supergene  gold  enrichment  of  a  low  grade  Birimian  carbonate-hosted  gold 
occurrence. We propose that the atypical carbonate nature of the host rocks represents a 
critical  factor  explaing  the  observed  variability  in  gold  mineralisation  at  both  the 
deposit- and camp-scale.  
vi

--- Page 16 ---
Sanogo, Fousseyni Samake, Monzon Traoré, Yakouba Koné, and Timothé Sogoba, for 
their warm welcome and making every fieldwork period great.  
I  acknowledge  the  Australian  Microscopy  and  Microanalysis  Research  Facility 
at  the  Centre  for  Microscopy,  Characterisation  and  Analysis;  a  facility  funded  by  the 
University  of  Western  Australia,  the  state,  and  Commonwealth  governments.  I 
especially  thank  Dr.  Janet  Muhling  and  Malcolm  Roberts  for  their  excellent  scientific 
assistance on the electron microprobe. I also acknowledge the John de Laeter Centre of 
Excellence for Mass Spectrometry at Curtin University in Western Australia. Hao Gao 
and Cristina Talavera are thanked for their tireless assistance on the mystical SHRIMP 
II. Noreen Evans and Bradley McDonald from Curtin University, Olivier Bruguier from 
Geosciences Montpellier, and Didier Béziat from Geosciences Environment Toulouse, 
are thanked for their expertise in the collection and interpretation of LA-ICPMS data.  
Outside the academic world, I wholeheartedly thank my mom Pascale, my dad 
Vincent,  my  sister  Manon,  and  my  brother  Arthur.  My  parents  have  always  provided 
unconditional love and inspiration. They passed me on values such as determination and 
curiosity, made me who I am. My sister and brother have always been instrumental in 
me  taking  time  off  and  not  saving  any  money  out  of  my  PhD  scholarship.  I  consider 
myself very lucky that I could spend wonderful times with them 15000 km away from 
home  visiting  unique  places  such  as  Shark  Bay,  Exmouth,  Kalbarri,  Karijini,  Cairns... 
(many more sites to list here but it would affect my credibility). Also, I need no words 
to thank the best person out there, my partner Margaux Le-Vaillant. In an ocean of great 
times working on my PhD project, there were times where I was irritable and depressed 
but Margaux has always been my true and great supporter. She is my love and my best 
friend, and I feel that we both learned how to live life to the fullest. To my friends Erik 
Cornelisse and Owen Perry, thank you for having me live the dream and reach a fluent 
level in Aussie slang. The irony has me settling down in Perth for 2 more years while 
you move back to Adelaide and Melbourne respectively. Keep up living the outdoor life 
(e.g.,  kitesurf,  surf)  and  may  we  meet  again  soon!  To  my  beach  volley-ball  partner 
Thierry Caron, thanks for the great atmosphere on court and showing me that losing is 
fun.  To  my  international  friends  at  CET,  Erwann  Lebrun  (fun  and  proactive  friend 
always enthusiastic for going out), Francois Voute (great roommate and all-rounder guy 
that  can  play  guitar  and  kite  surf),  James  Davis  (resourceful  field  geologist  aka 
“MacGyver” and devoted beer drinker), Luis Parra (friday balcony beer chief executive 
xvi

--- Page 17 ---
officer), Denis Fougerouse (aka the corridor walker, always keen to make conversation), 
Stephane  Roudaut  (aka  the  table  tennis  master),  and  Yoram  Teitler  (aka  the  mad 
fisherman),  my  time  as  a  PhD  student  would  have  been  dull  if  it  wasn’t  for  the  great 
social atmosphere prone to valuable distraction. 
xvii

--- Page 18 ---
xviii

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter I. Introduction  
1. Preamble and knowledge gaps 
Paleoproterozoic  (i.e.  Birimian)  volcano-plutonic  belts  and  sedimentary  basins 
of  West  Africa  not  only  provide  a  complete  record  of  crustal  growth  but  also  host  a 
number of world-class  gold  deposits  (Abouchami et al., 1990; Boher  et al., 1992). To 
date, a large number of studies have focused on the Baoulé-Mossi domain, which covers 
portions  of  Burkina  Faso,  Côte  d’Ivoire,  Ghana,  Guinea  and  Mali  (Fig.  1).  Gold 
deposits  of  various  types  have  been  recognised  in  these  Birimian  belts  and  include 
orogenic  gold  (e.g.,  Ashanti,  Allibone  et  al.,  2002a,  b),  intrusion-related  gold  (e.g., 
Morila, McFarlane et al., 2011; Hammond et al., 2011), Cu-Au porphyry (e.g., Gaoua, 
public data from AMIRA International West African Initiative final report, 2013), and 
paleoplacer  (e.g.,  Tarkwa,  Pigois  et  al.,  2003).  Detailed  deposit-scale  studies,  which 
integrated  structural-metamorphic-hydrothermal  data  with  high  precision  isotopic 
dating,  have  also  shown  evidence  for  distinct  gold  mineralisation  pulses  (e.g.,  2191-
2158 Ma gold at Wassa, Parra-Avila, in press; 2105 ± 2 Ma gold at Ashanti, Oberthür et 
al.,  1998;  2063  ±  9  Ma  gold  at  Damang,  Pigois  et  al.,  2003).  Nevertheless,  the  vast 
majority  of  world-class  gold  deposits  in  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  belong  to  the 
orogenic  class  (e.g.,  Groves  et  al.,  1998;  Goldfarb  et  al.,  2001;  Groves  et  al.,  2003; 
Goldfarb et al., 2005) and have been related to geological processes associated with the 
Eburnean  orogeny  dated  between  2115  and  2060  Ma  (e.g.,  Feybesse  et  al.,  2006; 
Lawrence et al., 2013; Fougerouse et al., in press; Lebrun et al., in press). A number of 
studies have been carried out elsewhere, in the Archean Kénéma-Man domain and the 
Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier  (Fig.  1),  but  have  been  limited  by  disjointed  political  and 
geographic landscapes, volatile social context, and the recent Ebola outbreak.  
The KKI represents the westernmost exposure (~22000 km2) of Birimian crust 
in the West African Craton and has received increased attention from both the industry 
and  academia  as  it  represents  an  emerging  world-class  gold  province.  The  geology  of 
the  inlier  consists  of  two  linear  volcano-plutonic  belts  (Mako  and  Falémé)  and 
1

--- Page 20 ---
intervening sedimentary basins (Dialé-Daléma and Kofi) (Fig. 2). It differs from other 
Birimian granite-greenstone belts by the abundance of carbonates, with thick sequences 
in  the  Dialé-Daléma  and  Kofi  Series  representing  the  most  extensive  carbonate 
exposure in the Birimian of West Africa (Bosse et al., 1996; Bering et al., 1998). The 
structural  architecture  of  the  inlier  is  marked  by  two  regional-scale  tectonic 
discontinuities, respectively the Senegal-Mali Shear Zone and Main Transcurrent Zone. 
A  number  of  world-class  mining  districts  are  located  along  these  highly  prospective 
lineaments  and  include  Loulo-Gounkoto  (~14  Moz),  Sadiola-Yatela  (~12  Moz),  and 
Sabodala-Massawa  (~12  Moz)  (Fig.  2).  Recent  discoveries  in  the  inlier  include  the 
Fekola  gold  deposit  (3.72  Moz  probable  mineral  reserves,  B2Gold  press  release,  July 
2015) and the Petowal gold deposit (mineral resource of 1.35 Moz contained Au, public 
data  from  ToroGold  website,  2015).  Recent  research  in  the  KKI  has  highlighted  the 
spatial  association  between  calc-alkaline  Eburnean  plutons,  gold  mineralisation,  and 
local iron skarn mineralisation, suggesting the potential role of a complex fluid history 
in  the  development  of  major  gold  deposits  (e.g.,  Loulo,  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a,  b; 
Massawa, Treloar et al., 2014; Falémé, Lambert-Smith, 2014).  
2

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 1. Geological map of the West African Craton (modified after Milési et al., 2004 SIGAfrique 
map, Lebrun et al., in press). 
3

--- Page 22 ---
The Sadiola-Yatela gold district is located in the Malian northeastern part of the 
inlier (Fig. 3). The region displays widespread evidence of ancient and recent artisanal 
mining,  with  written  records  of  mining  dating  back  more  than  250  years  (public  data 
from IAMGold website, 2015). The bulk of gold mineralisation in the district is hosted 
by carbonates, which is atypical for orogenic gold deposits worldwide (e.g., Goldfarb et 
al., 2005). Gold deposits of the district have been studied by geological consultants and 
during a 2-years-long one-on-one project involving researchers from the University of 
Witwatersrand in South Africa. The considered studies identified distinct styles of gold 
deposits  on  the  basis  of  differing  geological  characteristics.  As  of  2012,  however,  the 
apparent  variability  in  mineralisation  styles  led  to  contrasted  interpretations  that 
remained  to  be  effectively  integrated  with  knowledge  of  the  camp-scale  to  regional 
context. The concept of this study was to understand the underpinning factors that allow 
integration  of  the  observed  variability  in  gold  mineralisation  (e.g.,  structural  setting, 
host  rocks,  ore  and  alteration  paragenesis)  at  both  the  deposit-  and  camp-scale  into  a 
single  coherent  framework  of  value  to  exploration.  This  multi-scale  and  multi-
disciplinary  study  relied  on  the  use  of  the  mineral  system  approach,  whereby  gold 
deposits are viewed as local expressions of orogen- to lithospheric-scale processes (e.g., 
Bierlein et al., 2006; McCuaig et al., 2010; McCuaig and Hronsky, 2014). The results of 
this  study  were  aimed  directly  at  aiding  Brownfield  and  Greenfield  exploration 
strategies.  
4

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 2. Geologic map of the Kédougou-Kéniéba inlier (1:250,000 scale, modified after Gueye et 
al., 2007; Lawrence et al., 2013a). Inset map shows the geologic setting of the West African Craton 
(modified after Boher et al., 1992). The Falémé River forms the international border with Senegal 
to the west and Mali to the east and north. 
5

--- Page 24 ---
2. Aims of the thesis 
Based on the knowledge gaps identified in the Sadiola-Yatela gold district, the 
principal objectives of this study have been to:  
  Clarify the geological and structural setting of the deposits; 
  Establish  an  ore  and  alteration  paragenetic  sequence  integrated  with  the 
structural-metamorphic evolution for each deposit; 
 
Identify the metal enrichment associations of the deposits in order to provide a 
geochemical footprint to gold mineralisation;  
  Characterise the structural evolution of the district by integrating field mapping 
data with geophysical data-sets; 
  Frame the tectonic, magmatic, metamorphic and hydrothermal alteration history 
of the gold deposits in time with the help of focused U-Pb geochronology; 
  Develop an integrated model for the control on location and ore geometry within 
the Sadiola-Yatela region at the ore shoot, ore body, and district scale.  
3. Methodology 
This  section  provides  a  summary  of  each  method  used  in  the  course  of  the 
research.  Detailed  procedures  and  descriptions  of  the  various  analytical  methods  are 
provided in each chapter. 
3.1.  Fieldwork and geological sampling 
3.1.1.  Geological mapping 
The terrain in the Sadiola-Yatela region is flat at an average elevation of 125 m 
above the sea level. The region is characterized by a thick subtropical weathering profile 
that has obscured much of the surface geology. Geological mapping was conducted over 
12  weeks.  It  covered  all  gold  deposits  of  the  Sadiola-Yatela  mining  district  (Sadiola 
6

--- Page 25 ---
Hill,  Tambali,  Yatela,  Alamoutala,  KW18,  FE3-North,  FE3-South,  and  FE4)  and  a 
representative coverage of the surface outcrops in the region. Systematic face mapping 
was done on most accessible ramps of the open pits with a particular emphasis on the 
relationship  between  deformation,  magmatism,  hydrothermal  alteration  and  gold 
mineralisation. 3D geological modelling was performed ahead of the field investigation 
using Leapfrog® Mining and refined with advancing mapping. The trends of ore shoots 
in the orebodies were evaluated using three-dimensional rendering of grade control and 
exploration  drill-hole  assay  data.  In  addition  to  the  open  pit  mapping  exercise,  five 
regional  mapping  transects  were  undertaken  using  of  a  rugged  tablet  containing 
geophysical data such as magnetics and radiometrics under ArcGIS. Two transects were 
undertaken  across  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  from  East  to  West  and  two  transects 
investigated  sedimentary  rocks  of  the  Kofi  basin  all  the  way  to  the  escarpment  of 
Neoproterozoic cover.  
3.1.2.  Diamond drill core logging 
Drill  core  logging  was  conducted  over  4  weeks  and  included  spatially 
representative  diamond  drill  holes  from  individual  gold  deposits  (i.e.  Sadiola  Hill, 
Tambali,  Yatela,  Alamoutala,  KW18,  FE3-North,  FE3-South,  and  FE4).  Structural 
measurements  were  collected  using  a  rocket  launcher  device  and/or  using  α-β  angles 
protractors.  
3.1.3.  Geological sampling 
On the basis of the field observations, 215 samples were collected from outcrop 
in the open pits and diamond drill core. These rock samples were chosen to represent 
the main structural, lithological, and mineralogical variations observed in the deposits. 
In  addition,  62  samples  were  collected  from  outcrops  in  the  field  for  whole  rock 
geochemistry and petrographic characterisation.  
7

--- Page 26 ---
3.2.  Analytical techniques 
3.2.1.  Optical microscopy 
A total of 277 polished thin sections were prepared at the University of Western 
Australia  (UWA)  and  at  Vancouver  Petrographics  Ltd.  The  database  included  62 
polished  thin  sections  from  regional  outcrops,  60  from  Sadiola  Hill,  58  from 
Alamoutala,  41  from  Yatela,  10  from  FE3-FE4,  and  14  from  KW18.  Transmitted  and 
reflected light optical microscopy was used to investigate rock types, alteration textures 
and intensities, ore mineralogy, and strain fabrics in magmatic and sedimentary rocks of 
the region. Such study took place at the Centre for Exploration Targeting (UWA) and 
enabled prioritisation of samples for higher resolution microscopy. 
3.2.2.  Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Backscattered  electron  (BSE)  imaging  and  mineral  chemistry  analyses  were 
obtained using a Tescan Vega3 XM SEM equipped with an Oxford instrument X-ACT 
energy  dispersive  detector  (EDS)  at  the  Centre  for  Microscopy,  Characterisation  and 
Analysis  (UWA).  The  analytical  software  used  to  collect  semi-quantitative  micro-
analyses was the Oxford Instruments® INCA analytical suite. 
3.2.3.  Electron Probe Microanalyser 
A  JEOL  JXA-8530F  hyperprobe  (EPMA)  fitted  with  5  wavelength-dispersive 
spectrometers was used to collect quantitative data on silicates and ore minerals at the 
Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation and Analysis (UWA). The analytical software used 
to collect quantitative data was the Probe softwares® Probe for EPMA. Multi-elemental 
X-ray  mapping  of  minerals  was  carried  out  by  WD  spectrometry.  Mineral  mapping 
results were processed off-line with the CalcImage® software. 
8

--- Page 27 ---
Figure  3.  Geology  of  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  based  on  field  investigation  by  the  authors  and 
interpretation of SEMOS geophysical data sets. 
9

--- Page 28 ---
3.2.4.  Whole-rock geochemistry 
Least-altered  samples  of  representative  igneous  rocks  in  the  Sadiola-Yatela 
region were analysed for major and trace elements at the Intertek Genalysis Laboratory 
in Perth. Major elements were measured by XRF spectrometry. REE, HFSE and trace 
elements (e.g., Ba, Cr, Cs, Ga, Rb, Sc, Sn, Sr, U, V, W) were analysed by inductively 
coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry  (ICP-MS)  and  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical 
emission  spectrometry  (ICP-OES).  The  Geological  Survey  of  Western  Australia 
Bunbury  basalt  and  Kerba  granite  standards  were  analysed  during  each  session  to 
monitor accuracy and instrument stability.  
3.2.5.  U-Pb Geochronology  
U–Pb  analyses  on  magmatic  zircons  were  performed  using  the  sensitive  high-
resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP II) at the John de Laeter Centre of Excellence for 
Mass  Spectrometry  in  Curtin  University  (Western  Australia)  using  standard  operating 
procedures  similar  to  those  described  by  Compston  et  al.  (1984)  and  Wingate  and 
Kirkland  (2013).  Data  reduction  was  carried  out  using  the  softwares  SQUID  and 
ISOPLOT (Ludwig, 2003, 2009).  
3.2.6.  Laser Ablation - Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry 
In situ trace element concentrations in sulphides were determined by LA-ICPMS 
at the Géosciences Montpellier laboratories (France). Analyses were performed using a 
Geolas  (Microlas)  Excimer  ArF  automated  platform  housing  a  193  nm  Compex  102 
nanosecond laser from LambdaPhysik, coupled with a high-resolution ThermoFinnigan 
(ELEMENT XR) ICP-MS. Trace element concentrations were calculated following the 
procedure  in  Longerich  et  al.  (1996),  using  Laflamme-Po-726  (Sylvester  et  al.,  2005) 
and MASS-1 (Wilson et al., 2002) as external calibrators, and taking 57Fe as the internal 
calibrator. Raw data were processed using the WaveMetrics® Igor Pro analytical suite 
and the GLITTER software package.  
10

--- Page 29 ---
4. Structure of the thesis 
This  thesis  is  presented  as  a  series  of  four  manuscripts  tied  together  by  an 
introduction (chapter I) and a conclusion chapter (chapter VI). Such design follows the 
University of Western Australia regulations outlined in the Postgraduate Research and 
Scholarship handbook. Each manuscript is designed as a self-standing publication that 
includes background information on regional geology and consequently, minor overlap 
is  to  be  expected  between  the  chapters/manuscripts.  At  the  time  of  submission  of  this 
thesis (i.e. October 2015), two manuscripts (chapters II and III) have been accepted for 
publication in the Economic Geology Special Issue about the West African Craton. The 
third  manuscript  (chapter  IV)  has  been  accepted  for  publication  in  the  Journal  of 
African  Earth  Sciences.  The  last  manuscript  (chapter  V)  will  be  sent  to  Precambrian 
Research following submission of this thesis. 
The  first  manuscript  (chapter  II)  presents  the  geology,  tectonic  setting,  hydrothermal 
alteration,  and  ore  mineralogy  of  the  world-class  Sadiola  Hill  carbonate-hosted  gold 
deposit.  The  documented  results  are  integrated  with  available  data  on  other  gold 
deposits in the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier to form the basis of a metallogenic model.  
The  second  manuscript  (chapter  III)  presents  the  geology,  tectonic  setting,  contact 
metamorphism,  absolute  timing  and  whole  rock  geochemistry  of  the  local  intrusive 
stocks, hydrothermal alteration, and ore mineralogy of the Alamoutala gold deposit. The 
results  are  used  to  discuss  the  possible  links  between  local  magnetite  skarn  formation 
and regional orogenic gold mineralisation in the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier. 
The third chapter (chapter IV) focuses on the Yatela gold deposit, which is unique with 
respect to mineralisation types encountered in West Africa because the gold resource is 
hosted  by  a  gold-rich  dissolution  residue  derived  from  an  underlying  low-grade,  sub-
economic Birimian occurrence. 
The fourth manuscript (chapter V) provides a regional synthesis. It aims (i) to document 
for the first time the petrographical-geochemical characteristics and absolute timing of 
11

--- Page 30 ---
representative igneous rocks in the Sadiola-Yatela region and (ii) to place them into a 
regional  geological  framework  with  respect  to  polycyclic  deformation  and  gold 
mineralisation.  The  results  are  used  to  discuss  the  tectono-magmatic  evolution  of  the 
Kédougou-Kénieba inlier and geodynamic implications. 
The four manuscripts form sections of a coherent study on 4D evolution of the Sadiola-
Yatela gold system by integrating the structural, metamorphic and alteration history of 
the gold deposits. This study can be regarded as a multi-scale approach and zooms out 
from the deposit scale (chapter II-III-IV) to the district scale (chapter V).  
The  conclusion  (chapter  VI)  summarises  the  key  messages  of  this  thesis  and  their 
implication  for  exploration  targeting.  The  chapter  also  includes  a  discussion  on 
possibilities for future work. 
Electronic  Appendices  are  attached  to  this  thesis.  Appendix  A  corresponds  to  a  co-
authored  manuscript  (candidate  as  fourth  co-author)  accepted  for  publication  in  the 
Journal of African Earth Sciences. Electronic appendices B, C, D, and E are related to 
the fourth manuscript (chapter V). Appendix B contains whole rock geochemistry data 
for  representative  igneous  rocks  from  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region.  Appendix  C  contains 
U-Pb  geochronology  data  for  selected  igneous  rocks  from  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region. 
Individual  geochronology  reports  are  provided  in  Appendix  D.  Appendix  E  presents 
outcrop, hand specimen and petrographic descriptions for representative igneous rocks 
from the Sadiola-Yatela region.  
5. Justification of thesis format and authorship 
A number of collaborators  from different institutions worldwide  contributed to 
this  PhD  study.  The  candidate  confirms  that  each  manuscript  has  been  read  and 
approved by all named co-authors and that no other persons who satisfied the criteria of 
authorship  are  not  listed.  The  contributions  made  by  the  PhD  candidate  and  each  co-
author are as follow. 
12

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter  II:  the  manuscript  is  first  authored  by  the  candidate  Quentin  Masurel  and  co-
authored  by  Nicolas  Thébaud,  John  Miller,  Stanislav  Ulrich,  Kim  A.A.,  Hein,  Greg 
Cameron, Didier Beziat, Olivier Bruguier, and James A. Davis. The candidate was the 
main  scientific  investigator  and  is  responsible  for  writing  the  manuscript.  Nicolas 
Thébaud, John Miller and Stanislav Ulrich spent time with the candidate in the field and 
contributed  to  structural  data  collection.  The  considered  co-authors  also  provided 
insightful reviews that helped frame the manuscript into the suitable high standard for 
Economic  Geology.  Greg  Cameron  and  Kim  A.A.  Hein  communicated  deposit-scale 
field  observations  and  provided  excellent  scientific  feedback  on  the  presented  data. 
Didier  Beziat  and  Olivier  Bruguier  provided  their  expertise  for  the  collection  and 
interpretation  of  LA-ICPMS  data  on  sulphides.  James  A.  Davis  provided  editorial 
comments for the manuscript.  
Chapter III: the manuscript is first authored by the candidate Quentin Masurel and co-
authored by Nicolas Thébaud, John Miller, Stanislav Ulrich, Malcolm P. Roberts, and 
Didier Béziat. The candidate was the main scientific investigator and is responsible for 
writing  the  manuscript.  Nicolas  Thébaud,  John  Miller  and  Stanislav  Ulrich  spent  time 
with  the  candidate  in  the  field  and  helped  gather  geological  observations.  Nicolas 
Thébaud  and  John  Miller  also  provided  insightful  reviews  that  helped  frame  the 
manuscript  into  the  suitable  high  standard  for  Economic  Geology.  Malcolm  Roberts 
assisted with data collection using the electron probe microanalyser on garnet, pyroxene 
and magnetite. Malcolm Roberts also helped with data processing and provided insights 
on skarn mineralogy. Didier Béziat provided editorial comments and feedback on data 
interpretation. 
Chapter IV: the manuscript is first authored by the candidate Quentin Masurel and co-
authored  by  John  Miller,  Kim  A.A.  Hein,  Eric  Hanssen,  Nicolas  Thébaud,  Stanislav 
Ulrich,  Jean  Kaisin,  and  Samuel  Tessougue.  The  candidate  was  the  main  scientific 
investigator and is responsible for writing the manuscript. John Miller spent time with 
the candidate in the field and contributed to structural data collection. John Miller also 
assisted  in  building  a  three-dimensional  geological  model  of  the  deposit  under 
Leapfrog®.  Kim  A.A.  Hein  communicated  deposit-scale  field  observations  and 
provided  scientific  feedback  on  the  presented  data.  Eric  Hanssen  is  responsible  for 
13

--- Page 32 ---
drafting  the  geological  cross-section  of  the  Yatela  deposit  and  contributed  to  the 
descriptions of the karst infill stratigraphy. Eric Hanssen was critical in establishing the 
genetic link between primary gold mineralisation and the auriferous residuum at Yatela. 
Nicolas  Thébaud,  Stanislav  Ulrich,  Jean  Kaisin,  and  Samuel  Tessougue  provided 
scientific reviews and constructive comments for the manuscript.  
Chapter IV: the manuscript is first authored by the candidate Quentin Masurel and co-
authored  by  Nicolas  Thébaud,  John  Miller,  Stanislav  Ulrich.  The  candidate  was  the 
main  scientific  investigator  and  is  responsible  for  writing  the  manuscript.  Nicolas 
Thébaud, John Miller and Stanislav Ulrich spent time with the candidate in the field and 
contributed  to  structural  data  collection.  U-Pb  geochronology  work  (zircon  mount 
making, imaging and SHRIMP data collection) was undertaken by the candidate under 
the supervision of Nicolas Thébaud. John Miller provided re-processed geophysical data 
used  as  a  base  for  the  making  of  district-scale  geological  map.  John  Miller  also 
contributed to the interpretation of the structural evolution of the Sadiola-Yatela district. 
Stanislav  Ulrich  provided  a  comprehensive  appraisal  of  the  study  and  constructive 
scientific reviews.  
Electronic  Appendix  A:  the  manuscript  entitled  “The  Yatela  gold  deposit:  2  billion 
years  in  the  making”  has  recently  been  accepted  for  publication  in  the  Journal  of 
African Earth Sciences. It is first authored by Kim A.A. Hein and co-authored by Irvin 
R. Matsheka, Olivier Bruguier, the candidate Quentin Masurel, Delphine Bosch, Caby 
Renaud,  and  Patrick  Monié.  The  candidate  is  responsible  for  writing  the  U-Pb 
geochronology  section  on  the  Yatela  feldspathic  wacke  and  diorite,  and  associated 
analytical  procedures.  The  candidate  also  provided  feedback  and  constructive  reviews 
for the manuscript.  
14

--- Page 33 ---
6. Supporting references 
In  addition  to  the  manuscripts  intended  for  publication  listed  above,  the  PhD 
candidate has written a number of abstracts printed in international conference volumes 
and two short papers for the Mineral Atlas Monograph of the West African Craton to be 
published in Ore Geology Reviews in 2016.  
6.1.  Short scientific communication 
Masurel,  Q.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Miller,  J.,  Ulrich,  S.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  accepted  with  minor 
revisions. The world-class Sadiola Hill gold deposit in Mali, West Africa. Ore Geology 
Reviews. 
Masurel,  Q.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Miller,  J.,  Ulrich,  S.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  accepted  with  minor 
revisions.  The  Alamoutala  carbonated-hosted  gold  deposit  in  Mali,  West  Africa.  Ore 
Geology Reviews. 
6.2.  Peer-reviewed abstracts 
Masurel, Q., Miller, J., Thébaud, N., McCuaig, T.C., Ulrich, S., 2013, Structural setting 
and  mineralisation  of  the  carbonate-hosted  Sadiola  gold  deposit,  Mali,  West  Africa. 
SGA-12th biennial meeting, “Mineral deposits research for a high-tech world”, Uppsala, 
Sweden, August 12-15. 
Masurel,  Q.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Miller,  J.,  Ulrich,  S.,  2014,  Tectono-stratigraphic  evolution 
of the Sadiola gold camp, Mali, West Africa: defining the framework of a world-class 
gold province. Australian Earth Sciences Convention, Newcastle, NSW, Australia, July 
7-10. 
Masurel, Q., Thébaud, N., Miller, J., Ulrich, S., Terblanche, O., 2014, The world-class 
Sadiola  gold  camp,  Mali,  West  Africa:  evidence  for  contrasted  styles  of  carbonate-
15

--- Page 35 ---
controls  on  gold  mineralization  at  the  Bogoso  gold  mine,  Ghana,  West  Africa: 
Economic Geology, v. 97, p. 949–969. 
AMIRA  International  P934A  West  African  Exploration  Initiative  –  Stage  II,  Final 
Report, Appendix, p. 463-498.  
Bering,  D.,  Brinckmann,  J.,  Camara,  N.,  Diawara,  M.,  Gast,  L.,  and  Kieita,  S.,  1998, 
Evaluation  de  l’inventaire  des  ressources  minérales  de  Guinée:  Hannover, 
Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe, 109 p. 
Bierlein,  F.P.,  Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  and  Dubé,  B.,  2006,  Lithospheric  controls 
on  the  formation  of  provinces  hosting  giant  orogenic  gold  deposits:  Mineralium 
Deposita, v. 40, p. 874-886.  
Boher, M., Abouchami, W., Michard, A., Albarede, F., and Arndt, N.T., 1992, Crustal 
Growth in West Africa at 2.1 Ga: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 97, p. 345-
369. 
Bosse,  H.R.,  Gwosdz,  W.,  Lorenz,  W.,  Markwich,  H.,  Roth,  W.,  and  Wolff,  F.,  1996, 
Limestone  and  dolomite  resources  of  Africa:  Geologisches  Jahrbuch,  D102,  3-
532.  
B2Gold, 2015, Press release, B2Gold announces filling of thecnical report on the Fekola 
project. Accessed in 2015 on website http://www.b2gold.com. 
Feybesse,  J.L.,  Billa,  M.,  Guerrot,  C.,  Duguey,  E.,  Lescuyer,  J.L.,  Milesi,  J.P.,  and 
Bouchot, V., 2006, The paleoproterozoic Ghanaian province: Geodynamic model 
and  ore  controls,  including  regional  stress  modeling:  Precambrian  Research,  v. 
149, p. 149-196. 
Fougerouse, D., Micklethwaite, S., Ulrich, S., Miller, J., Godel, B., Adams, D. T. and 
McCuaig,  T.  C.,  in  press,  Evidence  for  two  stages  of  mineralization  in  West 
Africa’s largest gold deposit: Obuasi, Ghana: Economic Geology. 
Goldfarb, R.J., Baker, T., Dubé, B., Groves, D.I., Hart, C.J.R., and Gosselin, P., 2005, 
Distribution,  character,  and  genesis  of  gold  deposits  in  metamorphic  terranes: 
Economic Geology 100th Anniversary Volume, p. 407–450. 
Goldfarb, R.J., Groves, D.I., and Gardoll, S., 2001, Orogenic gold and geologic time: a 
global synthesis: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 18, p. 1-75.  
Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Robert,  F.,  and  Hart,  C.J.R.,  2003,  Gold  Deposits  in 
Metamorphic  Belts:  Overview  of  Current  Understanding  Outstanding  Problems, 
Future Research, and Exploration Significance: Economic Geology, v. 98, p. 1-29. 
17

--- Page 36 ---
Groves, D.I., Goldfarb, R.J., Gebre-Mariam, M., Hagemann, S.G., and Robert, F., 1998, 
Orogenic  gold  deposits:  A  proposed  classification  in  the  context  of  their  crustal 
distribution and relationship to other gold deposit types: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 
13, p. 7-27. 
Hammond,  N.,  Robb,  L.,  Foya,  S.,  and  Ishiyama,  D.,  2011,  Mineralogical,  fluid 
inclusion  and  stable 
isotope  characteristics  of  Birimian  orogenic  gold 
mineralization at the Morila Mine, Mali, West Africa: Economic Geolog, v. 39, p. 
218-229.  
IAMGold,  2015,  public  data  from  http://www.iamgold.com/Operations/Operating-
Mines/Yatela-GoldMine. 
Lambert-Smith, J., 2014, The geology, structure and metallogenesis of the world class 
Loulo-Bambadji  Au  district  in  Mali  and  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Kingston University London, U.K., 346 p. 
Lawrence, D.M., Treloar, P.J., Rankin, A.H., Harbidge, P., and Holliday, J., 2013a, The 
Geology  and  Mineralogy  of  the  Loulo  Mining  District,  Mali,  West  Africa: 
Evidence  for  Two  Distinct  Styles  of  Orogenic  Gold  Mineralization:  Economic 
Geology, v. 108, p. 199-227. 
Lawrence, D.M., Treloar, P. J., Rankin, A.H., Boyce, A., and  Harbidge, P., 2013b, A 
Fluid Inclusion and Stable Isotope Study at the Loulo Mining District, Mali, West 
Africa:  Implications  for  Multifluid  Sources  in  the  Generation  of  Orogenic  Gold 
Deposits: Economic Geology, v. 108, p. 229-257. 
Lebrun,  E.,  Miller,  J.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Ulrich,  S.,  McCuaig,  T.C.,  in  press,  Structural 
controls on an orogenic gold system: the world-class Siguiri gold district, Siguiri 
basin, Guinea, West Africa: Economic Geology.  
Lebrun, E., Thébaud, N., Miller, J., Ulrich, S., Bourget, J. and Terblanche, O., in press, 
Geochronology and lithostratigraphy of the Siguiri district: implications for gold 
mineralisation in the Siguiri Basin (Guinea, West Africa): Precambrian Research. 
McFarlane,  C.  R.  M.,  Mavrogenes,  J.,  Lentz,  D.,  King,  K.,  Allibone,  A.,  and  
Holcombe, R., 2011, Geology and Intrusion-Related Affinity of the Morila Gold 
Mine, Southeast Mali: Economic Geology, v. 106, p. 727-750. 
McCuaig, T.C., and Hronsky, J.M.A., 2014, The Mineral System Concept: The Key to 
Exploration Targeting: Society of Economic Geologists Special Publication, v. 18, 
p. 153-175.  
18

--- Page 37 ---
McCuaig,  T.C.,  Beresford,  S.,  and  Hronsky,  J.M.A.,  2010,  Translating  the  mineral 
systems  approach  into  an  effective  exploration  targeting  system:  Ore  Geology 
Reviews, v. 38, p. 128-138.  
Milési,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Pinna,  P.,  Deschamps,  Y.,  Kampunzu,  H.,  Muhongo,  S., 
Lescuyer,  J.L.,  Le  Goff,  E.,  Delor,  C.,  and  Billa,  M.,  2004,  Geological  map  of 
Africa  1:10,000,000,  SIGAfrique  project:  20th  Conference  of  African  Geology, 
BRGM, Orléans, France, p. 2-7.  
Oberthür, T., Vetter, U., Davis, D.W., and Amanor, J.A., 1998, Age constraints on gold 
mineralization  and  Paleoproterozoic  crustal  evolution  in  the  Ashanti  belt  of 
southern Ghana: Precambrian Research, v. 89, p. 129-143. 
Parra-Avila,  L.A.,  Bourassa,  Y.,  Miller,  J.,  Perrouty,  S.,  Fiorentini,  M.,  and  McCuaig, 
T.C., in press, Age constrains of the Wassa and Benso mesothermal gold deposits, 
Ashanti belt, Ghana, West Africa: Journal of African Earth Sciences. 
Pigois, J.P., Groves, D.I., Fletcher, I.R., McNaughton, N.J., and Snee, L.W., 2003, Age 
constraints  on  Tarkwaian  paleoplacer  and  lode-gold  formation  in  the  Tarkwa-
Damang district, SW Ghana: Mineralium Deposita, v. 38, p. 695-714.  
ToroGold, 2015, Mako project Definitive Feasibility Study overview. Accessed in 2015 
on website http://www.torogold.com/en/projects/ 
19

--- Page 38 ---
20

--- Page 39 ---
Chapter II. Sadiola Hill: a world-class carbonate-hosted 
gold deposit in Mali, West Africa.  
Quentin Masurel1*, Nicolas Thébaud1, John Miller1, Stanislav Ulrich2, Kim A. A. Hein3, Greg 
Cameron4, Didier Béziat5, Olivier Bruguier6, James A. Davis1 
1Centre for Exploration Targeting, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, 
WA, Australia. 
2AngloGold Ashanti Australia Limited, Asset Development - Brownfields, 44 St. Georges Terrace, Perth, 
WA, Australia. 
3University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. 
4Cameron and Associates Pty. Ltd., Perth, WA, Australia. 
5Laboratoire Géosciences Environment Toulouse, UMR-CNRS 5563, Université Paul Sabatier, France. 
6Geosciences Montpellier, UMR-CNRS 5543, Université de Montpellier, France. 
*Corresponding author: qmasurel@hotmail.com 
Keywords:  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  Sadiola,  carbonate-hosted  gold,  Eburnean 
orogeny, Au-As-Sb metal signature. 
1. Abstract 
The ~8 Moz Sadiola Hill gold deposit is located in the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier, 
a  window  of  deformed  ca.  2200-2050  Ma  rocks  that  outcrops  in  eastern  Senegal  and 
western  Mali.  The  geology  of  the  inlier  differs  from  other  Paleoproterozoic  granite-
greenstone  belts  and  sedimentary  basins  by  the  abundance  of  carbonate  rocks.  The 
Sadiola  Hill  gold  deposit  occurs  within  3  km  of  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and 
country 
rocks 
in 
the 
region  have  undergone  polycyclic  deformation.  The 
lithostratigraphy  of  the  open  pit  consists  of  impure  limestones  overlain  by  younger 
sequences  of  detrital  sedimentary  rocks,  which  include  arenite,  wacke,  and  siltstone. 
The  sedimentary 
rocks  have  been  subjected 
to 
regional  greenschist-facies 
metamorphism and have been intruded by multiple generations of syn-kinematic, calc-
alkaline stocks and dikes. The bulk of the ore is hosted within a N-S- to NNW-trending, 
10-  to  50-m-wide,  brittle-ductile  dilational  shear  zone  defined  as  the  Sadiola  Fracture 
21

--- Page 40 ---
Zone.  Gold  lodes  also  occur  along  an  array  of  steep  NNE-trending  shears.  Geometric 
and kinematic analyses indicate that the ore-hosting structures were undergoing sinistral 
displacement  at  the  time  of  mineralization,  locally  defined  as  the  D3s  NNW-SSE 
shortening  event.  Hydrothermal  alteration  is  polyphase  and  includes  an  early  high 
temperature  calc-silicate  phase  (i.e.,  porphyroblastic  growth  of  actinolite-tremolite) 
followed  by  a  potassic  phase  (i.e.,  biotite-calcite-quartz  ±  K-feldspar-tourmaline-
actinolite) that was synchronous with ore mineral deposition. Paragenetic studies reveal 
a multistage ore development that includes an As-rich sulfide stage, followed by an Au-
Sb stage. The ore is associated with a metal enrichment suite of Au-As-Sb ± Cu-Fe-W-
Mo-Ag-Bi-Zn-Pb-Te.  The  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  shares  a  similar  relative  timing  and 
structural setting to that of other world-class orogenic gold systems in the West African 
Craton  (e.g.  Ashanti,  Loulo),  with  gold  deposition  occurring  during  a  period  of 
transcurrent tectonics soon after the cessation of region-wide contractional deformation. 
The high temperature ore and alteration paragenesis at Sadiola Hill is atypical of gold 
mineralization  in  the  craton  and  indicates  that  the  late  Eburnean  tectono-magmatic 
activity  between  ca.  2090  and  2070  Ma  played  an  important  role  in  the  dynamics  of 
hydrothermal fluid circulation along the Senegal-Mali Shear Zone.  
2. Introduction 
The  Paleoproterozoic  terranes  of  the  West  African  Craton  host  a  number  of 
world-class gold deposits that are related to orogenic processes associated with the ca. 
2120-2060 Ma Eburnean orogeny (Milési et al., 1992; Oberthür et al., 1998; Goldfarb et 
al., 2001; Feybesse et al., 2006; McFarlane et al., 2011; Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar 
et  al.,  2014;  Fougerousse  et  al.,  this  volume;  Lebrun  et  al.,  this  volume).  Within  the 
Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier  (KKI),  the  Sadiola  and  Loulo  gold  districts  contain  some  of 
the largest gold endowments in west Africa outside of the Ashanti belt in Ghana. Gold 
deposits in the inlier are hosted by a wide range of host rocks including mafic volcanics, 
detrital sedimentary rocks, and carbonates. Host rocks have been subjected to regional 
greenschist-facies  metamorphism  and  have  undergone  polycyclic  deformation.  Gold 
mineralization  in  the  KKI  is  interpreted  to  result  from  protracted  hydrothermal  fluid 
circulation along regional-scale lineaments, which include the Senegal-Mali Shear Zone 
22

--- Page 41 ---
(SMSZ)  and  the  Main  Transcurrent  Zone  (MTZ),  and  along  local  NNE-trending 
structures during late-Eburnean tectono-thermal activity between ca. 2090 and 2070 Ma 
(Schwartz and Melcher, 2004; Lawrence et al, 2013a; Treloar et al., 2014). Despite gold 
deposits  in  the  KKI  sharing  a  similar  relative  timing  and  structural  setting,  gold 
mineralization  occurs  in  a  variety  of  styles  including  epizonal  orogenic  Au-As-Sb 
mineralization  at  Massawa  (~3.6  Moz)  (Treloar  et  al.,  2014),  As-rich  orogenic  gold 
mineralization  at  Yalea  (~6.3  Moz),  and  polymetallic  Fe-B-rich  orogenic  gold 
mineralization at Gara (~3.1 Moz) (Lawrence et al., 2013a, b). These gold deposits have 
developed  synchronously  with  the  generation  of  large  melt  volumes,  leading  to  the 
possibility of a genetic connection.  
Recent  studies  by  Lawrence  et  al.  (2013a,  b)  and  Treloar  et  al.  (2014)  have 
suggested the diversity in mineralization styles and ore paragenesis in the KKI resulted 
from hydrothermal systems that sourced fluids and metals from both metamorphic and 
magmatic reservoirs. Such diversity appears to be largely controlled by the distance of 
the  deposits  from  the  regional-scale  lineaments  and  late  Eburnean  syn-kinematic 
intrusions. Yalea-style deposits occur along brittle-ductile shears as far as 8 km from the 
SMSZ and share characteristics typical of Birimian gold mineralization in the Ashanti 
belt of Ghana. In contrast, a magmatic hydrothermal influence has been suggested for 
the  Gara  deposit,  which  occurs  within  2  km  of  the  SMSZ,  and  shows  possible  links 
between  gold  mineralization  and  magnetite  skarn  development  in  the  region  (e.g., 
Falémé  iron  district).  The  shear-hosted  Massawa  deposit  occurs  within  3  km  of  the 
MTZ  and  is  related  to  a  magmatic  fluid  derived  from  syn-kinematic  quartz-feldspar-
porphyry  sills.  The  goal  of  this  contribution  is  to  summarize  the  geology,  tectonic 
setting, hydrothermal alteration, and ore mineralogy of the Sadiola Hill gold deposit in 
an attempt to clarify its genesis. The results are then integrated with available data on 
other world-class gold deposits in the KKI to form the basis of a metallogenic model.  
3. Regional geology 
The  Sadiola  Hill  gold  deposit  is  located  along  the  NNE  margin  of  the  KKI, 
which  crops  out  in  eastern  Senegal  and  western  Mali.  This  inlier,  which  consists  of  a 
window of deformed Paleoproterozoic terranes, represents the westernmost exposure of 
23

--- Page 42 ---
the  ca.  2200–2050  Ma  Birimian  Supergroup  of  the  West  African  Craton.  The  KKI  is 
bounded on its western margin by the Hercynian Mauritanides (Villeneuve, 2008) and is 
unconformably  overlain  by  flat-lying  Neoproterozoic  sandstones  of  the  Taoudeni 
intracratonic basin on all other sides (Villeneuve and Cornée, 1994) (inset, Fig. 1). The 
geology of the KKI can be divided into two volcano-plutonic belts and two sedimentary 
basins based on the location of two regional-scale lineaments, the MTZ and the SMSZ 
(Fig.  1).  Bassot  (1987)  defined  the  Mako  belt  to  the  west  of  the  MTZ  and  the  Dialé-
Daléma  basin  to  the  east.  The  Falémé  belt  is  recognized  as  a  distinct  entity  from  the 
Dialé-Daléma  basin  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002; Lawrence, 2010) and is bordered to the 
east  by  the  SMSZ.  The  Kofi  basin,  as  first  defined  by  Klöckner  Industrie  (1989),  is 
situated east of the SMSZ. The Dialé-Daléma and Kofi sedimentary basins contain the 
most extensive occurrence of carbonate rocks in the Birimian (Bessoles, 1977).  
The  Mako  belt  (Fig.  1)  consists  of  tholeiitic  basalts  and  calc-alkaline  andesitic  lavas 
intercalated  with  minor  immature  sedimentary  and  volcaniclastic  rocks  (Hirdes  and 
Davis, 2002; Dioh et al., 2006; Gueye et al., 2008). The volcanic assemblage has been 
dated between 2160 ± 16 Ma (Boher et al., 1992; Sm-Nd on whole rock andesite) and 
2197  ±  13  Ma  (Dia,  1988;  Sm-Nd  on  whole  rock basalt). The Mako crustal rocks are 
intruded by a group of variably deformed syn-tectonic plutons, such as the Tinkoto and 
Mamakono granodiorites, respectively dated at 2074 ± 9 Ma and 2076 ± 3 Ma (Bassot 
and Caen-Vachette, 1984; Dia et al., 1997; Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Gueye et al., 2007; 
U-Pb zircon). Geochemical and isotopic studies of the volcanic package and intrusions 
from the Mako belt suggest a volcanic arc setting (Dia et al., 1997; Dioh et al., 2006; 
Pawlig et al., 2006).  
The  Dialé-Daléma  basin  (Fig.  1)  consists  of  thick  sequences  of  wackes,  arenites, 
conglomerates,  siltstones,  and  argillites 
that  are 
intercalated  with  carbonates, 
volcaniclastics,  andesite  lavas,  and  rhyolitic  pyroclastites  (Bassot,  1997;  Hirdes  and 
Davis,  2002).  Conglomerates  of  the  Dialé-Daléma  basin  host  boulders  of  carbonate 
from  the  lower  units  of  the  series  and  pebbles  sourced  from  the  Mako  belt  (Bassot, 
1997).  Detrital  zircons  from  a  quartz  wacke  in  the  Dialé-Daléma  basin  indicate  a 
uniform  age  of  2165  ±  1  Ma  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Pb-Pb  zircon)  for  the  source 
material.  Rocks  of  the  Dialé-Daléma  Series  are  intruded  by  the  peraluminous,  K-rich 
Saraya  granite,  which  has  been  dated  at  2079  ±  2  Ma  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  U-Pb 
zircon). 
24

--- Page 43 ---
The  Falémé  belt  (Fig.  1)  consists  of  calc-alkaline  volcaniclastic  rocks,  wackes,  chert, 
manganiferous  shale,  minor  andesitic  lavas,  and  local  rhyolite  flows  (Ndiaye  et  al., 
1997; Hirdes and Davis 2002; Lawrence, 2010). The Falémé belt has been intruded by 
numerous  syn-tectonic,  belt-type,  calc-alkaline  granitoids  (Ndiaye  et  al.,  1997;  Hirdes 
and  Davis,  2002)  such  as  the  Boto  tonalite  dated  at  2082  ±  1  Ma  and  the  Boboti 
granodiorite dated at 2080 ± 1 Ma (Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Pb-Pb zircon). The plutons 
are spatially and genetically associated with iron skarns of the Falémé district (Schwartz 
and Melcher, 2004).  
The  Kofi  basin,  which  is  host  to  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit,  consists  of  a  sequence  of 
carbonates, wackes, arenites, siltstones, and calcareous clastic rocks (Fig. 1) (Lawrence 
et al., 2013a). Detrital zircons in the Loulo area have been dated between 2156 ± 10 Ma 
and  2125  ±  8  Ma  (Calvez  et  al.,  1990;  Pb-Pb  zircon).  The  peraluminous  Gamaye 
leucogranite that intruded the Kofi sediments has been dated at 2045 ± 27 Ma (Bassot 
and Caen-Vachette, 1984; Rb-Sr on whole rock). 
Birimian rocks of the KKI have undergone polycyclic deformation. Early phases 
of fold-and-thrust tectonics (D1-D2) linked to initial accretion are followed by a period 
of transcurrent tectonics (D3-D4) (Ledru et al., 1991; Milési et al., 1992; Dabo and Aïfa, 
2010, 2011; Diene et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar et al., 2014). A similar 
polyphase character has been reported in other Birimian terranes of West Africa (e.g., in 
Ivory  Coast,  Pouclet  et  al.,  2006;  Vidal  et  al.,  2009;  in  Burkina  Faso,  Hein,  2010;  in 
Guinea,  Lahondère  et  al.,  2002;  in  southern  Mali,  McFarlane  et  al.,  2011;  in  southern 
Ghana, Feybesse et al., 2006; in Burkina Faso, Baratoux et al., 2011). The SMSZ and 
MTZ have been interpreted to represent major transpressional faults initiated during D2 
(Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  The  D3  event  is  associated  with  fluid  flow  and  sinistral 
displacement along the regional-scale lineaments, voluminous calc-alkaline magmatism, 
and gold mineralization between ca. 2090 and 2070 Ma (Pons et al., 1992; Hirdes and 
Davis, 2002; Gueye et al., 2007, 2008; McFarlane et al., 2011; Lawrence et al., 2013a; 
Treloar et al., 2014). The major shear zones acted as the main conduits for hydrothermal 
fluids in the region, with gold deposits located along lower order N-S splays (e.g., Yalea 
Shear) and steep NNE-trending sinistral shears that formed during the D3 deformation 
(Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  The  D4  event  is  associated  with  a  late  dextral  reactivation 
between ca. 2070 and 2050 Ma (Dabo and Aïfa, 2011). Available metamorphic data for 
the  KKI  point  to  peak  metamorphism  under  regional  greenschist-facies  conditions 
25

--- Page 44 ---
(Debat et al., 1984; Liégeois et al., 1991; Dia et al., 1997). Hornblende-hornfels contact 
aureoles  have  locally  been  observed  surrounding  Eburnean  granitoids  (Debat  et  al., 
1984; Pawlig et al., 2006).  
4. Mining background 
The Sadiola Hill deposit and satellite occurrences are mined by the Société des 
Mines  d’Or  du  Mali  (SEMOS),  a  joint  venture  between  AngloGold  Ashanti  Limited, 
IAMGold  Corporation,  and  the  government  of  Mali.  The  region  displays  widespread 
evidence of ancient and recent artisanal mining, and written records of mining date back 
more  than  300  years  (public  data  from  IAMGOLD  website).    However,  the 
development  of  the  Sadiola  Hill  mine  began  in  1992  and  was  based  on  proven  and 
probable reserves amounting to 49.2 Mt of oxide and partly oxidized ore at an average 
grade of 2.86 g/t Au, representing approximately 4.5 Moz (141 t) of contained gold to 
an average depth of 140 m (Boshoff et al., 1998). The first gold bar was poured in 1996. 
Mining  ceased  in  2011,  but  evaluation  and  feasibility  studies  of  the  deeper  sulfide 
orebody  are  in  progress,  considering  new  open  pit  mining  and  a  pushback  of  the 
existing pit. As of December 31, 2012, the Sadiola Hill sulfide orebody recorded proven 
and probable reserves of 3.853 Moz at 1.78 g/t (AngloGold Ashanti Ltd. 2012 mineral 
resource and ore reserve report).  
26

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 1.  Geologic  map  of the  Birimian Kédougou-Kéniéba  inlier (1:250,000  scale,  modified  after 
Gueye et al., 2007; Lawrence et al., 2013a). Inset map shows the geologic setting of the West African 
Craton (modified after Boher et al., 1992). The Falémé River forms the international border with 
Senegal to the west and Mali to the east and north. Abbreviations refer to plutons mentioned in the 
text: Bal = Balangouma tonalite, Bo = Boboti granodiorite, Ga = Gamaye granite, Ma = Mamakono 
granodiorite, SF = South Falémé pluton, Ti = Tinkoto granodiorite.  
27

--- Page 46 ---
5. Materials and methods 
5.1.  Pit mapping, 3D modeling, logging and sampling 
Systematic face mapping was completed on all accessible ramps of the mine at 
the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit.  Detailed  section  logging  was  undertaken  and  included  10 
diamond  drill  holes  chosen  to  represent  the  main  structural,  lithological,  and 
mineralogical  variations  observed  in  the  deposit.  Petrographic  data  reported  in  this 
paper largely come from drill core samples and, to a lesser extent, from oriented blocks 
sampled directly in the field. All structural readings are given in true north coordinates. 
Planar  features  were  reported  in  strike/dip/quadrant  and  linear  data  as  plunge  and 
azimuth. In this paper, the “s” subscript indicates that the considered structural event is 
only  valid  for  the  Sadiola  district,  which  may  differ  from  regional  structural 
compilations  reported  for  the  West  African  Craton.  The  trends  of  ore  shoots  in  and 
surrounding the orebody were evaluated using Leapfrog® three-dimensional rendering 
of the assay data, which combined grade control and exploration. 
5.2.  Petrographic study 
More than 100 samples were collected from diamond drill core and directly in 
the  Sadiola  Hill  pit.  The  considered  suite  of  samples  included  country  rocks  with 
various alteration types and intensities, and all ore types. Approximately  100 polished 
thin-sections  were  prepared  at  the  University  of  Western  Australia  (UWA)  and  at 
Vancouver  Petrographics  Ltd.  These  were  studied  using  optical  microscopy  at  the 
Centre  for  Exploration  Targeting  at  UWA,  and  scanning  electron  microscopy  and 
electron  microprobe  at  the  Centre  for  Microscopy,  Characterisation  and  Analysis  at 
UWA.  Backscattered  electron  (BSE)  imaging  and  mineral  chemistry  analyses  were 
obtained  using  a  Tescan  Vega3  XM  (SEM)  equipped  with  an  Oxford  instrument  X-
ACT  energy  dispersive  spectrometer  (EDS)  and  JEOL  JXA-8530F  Hyperprobe  fitted 
with  five  wavelength-dispersive  spectrometers  (EPMA).  Quantitative  microanalyses 
were  performed  using  internal  proprietary  standards.  The  analytical  software  used  to 
collect  semi-quantitative  micro-analytical  data  was  the  Oxford  Instruments®  INCA 
28

--- Page 47 ---
analytical suite on the Tescan Vega 3. Operating parameters for the SEM-EDS include 
an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, a working distance of 15 mm, a beam current of 1.5 
nA, and a detector process time of 4 s. Operating conditions for WD analysis were an 
accelerating voltage of 20 kV, a beam current of 40 nA, and a counting time of 40 s on 
peak  for  sulfides.  Mean  atomic  number  background  and  ZAF  corrections  were  used 
throughout. The algorithm utilized was that of Armstrong (1988). 
5.3.  Arsenopyrite geothermometry 
Despite  being  an  empirical  thermometer,  and  therefore  not  fully  quantitative, 
arsenopyrite geothermometry can be used to estimate the temperature of mineralization 
(Kretschmar and Scott, 1976; Sharp et al., 1985). Quantitative in-situ microanalyses of 
20  selected  arsenopyrite  crystals  were  performed  with  a  field  emission  electron 
microprobe JXA-8530F (EPMA) using internal standard databases. Analytical data are 
provided  in  the  supplementary  material.  The  lack  of  optical  and  chemical  zoning  of 
analyzed  crystals,  the  assumption  of  equilibrium  with  pyrite-pyrrhotite,  and  the  low 
content  (<  1  wt.%)  of  combined  minor  elements  along  with  the  suitable  Fe  content 
allow  for  the  use  of  the  arsenopyrite  geothermometer  (Kretschmar  and  Scott,  1976; 
Sharp et al., 1985). Crystallization temperatures were determined using the ƒS2-buffered 
arsenopyrite-pyrite-pyrrhotite equilibrium.  
5.4.  LA-ICPMS on sulfides 
A  refractory  ore  component  has  recently  been  indentified  at  the  Massawa 
orogenic gold deposit (Treloar et al., 2014). Multistage ore development included a low-
grade (<10 g/t) and high-tonnage As-rich sulfide stage, followed by a high-grade (>10 
g/t) and low-tonnage Au-Sb stage. Approximatively 75-90 % of the first stage gold is 
refractory  in  nature  and  occurs  as  solid  solution  gold  in  the  crystal  lattice  of 
disseminated  arsenopyrite  and  pyrite  (Treloar  et  al.,  2014).  Laser  ablation  work  was 
undertaken  for  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  following  the  identification  of  a  similar  ore 
paragenetic sequence to that reported for Massawa. The results were used to assess the 
potential  for  a  refractory  gold  ore  component  and  provide  insights  into  the  chemical 
29

--- Page 48 ---
conditions of the ore-forming fluid. In situ trace element concentrations of arsenopyrite 
and  pyrite  grains  were  determined  by  laser  ablation  inductively-coupled  plasma  mass 
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) at Géosciences Montpellier (France). A total of 44 analyses 
were  collected  on  four  mineralized  samples  chosen  for  their  mineralogical  and  micro-
textural  characteristics.  Analyses  were  performed  using  a  Geolas  (Microlas)  Excimer 
ArF  automated  platform  housing  a  193  nm  Compex  102  nanosecond  laser  from 
LambdaPhysik,  coupled  with  a  single  collector,  high-resolution  ThermoFinnigan 
(ELEMENT XR) ICP-MS. Ablation experiments were conducted in an ablation cell of 
~30 cm3
 in a He atmosphere (0.6 lmin-1). The helium gas stream and particles from the 
sample were then mixed with Ar  (1 lmin-1) before entering the plasma.  The laser was 
fired using a fluence of 12 J/cm2 at a frequency of 5 Hz and using a spot size of 51 μm. 
Trace element concentrations were calculated following the procedure in Longerich et 
al. (1996), using Laflamme-Po-726 (Sylvester et al., 2005) and MASS-1 (Wilson et al., 
2002) as external calibrators, and taking  57Fe as the internal calibrator. Raw data were 
processed  using  the  GLITTER  software  package  (e.g.  Velásquez  et  al.,  2014).  The 
following isotopes were monitored: 29Si, 31P, 33S, 34S, 43Ca, 47Ti, 51V, 55Mn, 57Fe, 59Co, 
60Ni,  65Cu,  66Zn,  75As,  82Se,  85Rb,  88Sr,  90Zr,  95Mo,  103Rh,  105Pd,  106Pd,  107Ag,  111Cd, 
118Sn, 121Sb, 125Te, 137Ba, 139La, 182W, 195Pt, 197Au, 205Tl, 208Pb, and 209Bi. Trace element 
data,  achieved  detection  limits,  and  1σ  errors  are  provided  in  the  supplementary 
material.  
6. Deposit geology 
The Sadiola Hill deposit is located approximately 425 km northwest of the Mali 
capital Bamako, near the border with Senegal. The terrain surrounding the Sadiola Hill 
gold  mine  is  flat  at  an  average  elevation  of  125  m  above  the  sea  level.  The  region  is 
characterized  by  a  thick  subtropical  weathering  profile  that  has  obscured  much  of  the 
surface  geology.  Nevertheless,  the  first-order  geological  features  that  characterize  the 
Sadiola  Hill  gold  deposit  are  outlined  below.  Host  rocks  in  the  Sadiola  area  have 
undergone  regional  greenschist  facies  metamorphism.  For  the  purpose  of  clarity,  the 
prefix “meta” will be omitted in the following section. 
30

--- Page 49 ---
6.1.  Sedimentary rocks 
The geology of the Kofi basin in the Sadiola Hill deposit area consists of impure 
carbonates,  wackes,  and  arenites  to  the  west,  progressing  to  siltstones  and  argillites 
towards  the  east.  The  structural  mapping  of  the  open  pit  and  surrounding  outcrops 
provides  evidence  for  complex  folding  and  stacking  of  the  original  strata  during  the 
Eburnean orogeny (Fig. 2). Based on pit mapping and core logging, the lithostratigraphy 
of  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  consists  of  impure  carbonates  overlain  by  younger  detrital 
sedimentary  rocks  (Fig.  3).  The  contact  between  the  two  rock  types  is  faulted  and 
represented  by  the  N-S-  to  NNW-trending  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone.  Impure  limestones 
(>250 m thick) crop out on the eastern walls of the pit and are interlayered with minor 
dolomitic  horizons.  The  limestone  is  well-bedded  and  characterized  by  abundant  thin 
(0.2-2  cm)  argillaceous-silty  interbeds.  The  impure  limestones  have  recrystallized  as 
silty  marbles  adjacent  to  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  along  the 
steep NNE-trending faults. Detrital sedimentary rocks crop out on the western walls of 
the  pit  and  are  dominated  by  feldspathic  wacke,  and  arkosic  arenite  with  discrete 
decimeter-scale  beds  (Fig.  3).  Minor  siltstone  and  shale  interbeds  occur  within  these 
coarser-grained  packages  and  are  best  observed  close  to  the  contact  with  the  basal 
carbonate  unit.  Well-preserved  way-up  indicators,  such  as  fining-upwards  sequences 
and rare cross-beds in sandstone, indicate upright beds with a younging direction to the 
west. 
31

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 2. Geology of the Sadiola-Yatela mining and exploration permit based on SEMOS regional 
map (2014) and field investigation by the authors (scale 1:35,000).  
32

--- Page 51 ---
6.2. 
Intrusions and relationship to metasedimentary rocks 
Numerous  syn-tectonic  granitoids  have  intruded  the  sedimentary  rocks  of  the 
Kofi  basin  to  the  east  of  the  SMSZ  (Fig.  2).  Chemical  and  detrital  sedimentary  rocks 
exposed  in  the  Sadiola  Hill  open  pit  are  intruded  by  three  successive  generations  of 
intrusion, namely early diorite, quartz-feldspar porphyry, and late diorite. All intrusive 
rocks were affected by the late sinistral shearing.  
Diorite stocks, and discontinuous dikes and sills were emplaced parallel to sub-parallel 
to bedding at the lithostratigraphic contact between carbonate and sandstone units (Fig. 
3). The least-altered samples from this suite indicate that the rock is largely composed 
of  plagioclase  grains  (>80  %  modal  vol.),  which  are  fine-grained  (<  2  mm  in  size). 
Magmatic green hornblende is common (5-10 % modal vol.), whereas quartz remains a 
minor phase (<10 % modal vol.). In drill-core, the main early diorite body to the south 
of  the  Sadiola  Hill  open  pit  is  locally  bordered  by  zones  of  contact-metasomatized 
country rocks. Garnet-rich mineral assemblages are observed in the proximal aureole (0-
2 m) in silty-marble, whereas pyroxene-rich assemblages tend to dominate further away 
from  the  intrusive  contact  (2-5  m).  Retrograde  alteration  of  the  garnet-pyroxene 
exoskarns  to  a  lower  temperature  hydrous  silicate  assemblage  is  minor  and 
characterized  by  epidote-clinozoisite,  calcite,  hornblende,  quartz,  and  chlorite,  with 
minor to traces of pyrite and magnetite.  
The  second  generation  of  intrusions,  the  quartz-feldspar  porphyries,  consists  of  sub-
vertical  NNE-trending  felsic  dikes  and  stocks  (Fig.  3).  The  dikes  are  generally  1-2  m 
wide  and  are  spatially  associated  with  NNE-trending  faults.  These  dikes  crosscut  the 
first generation diorite bodies, impure carbonates, and detrital sedimentary rocks. Their 
texture  is  quartz-feldspar-phyric  and  their  mineralogy  is  consistent  with  that  of  a 
granite. In thin section, the least-altered samples exhibit sub-rounded sparse quartz (5-
10  %  modal  vol.)  and  euhedral  prismatic  feldspar  phenocrysts  (5-10  %  modal  vol., 
plagioclases ≈ K-feldspars) set in a fine-grained (<0.1 mm) to very fine-grained (<0.05 
mm)  equant  quartzo-feldspathic  groundmass  (80-90  %  modal  volume).  The  dikes  are 
associated  with  narrow  zones  (<1.5  m)  of  hydraulic  fracturing  and  silicification  of 
country rocks and may contain partially digested greywacke xenoliths.  
33

--- Page 52 ---
Figure 3. Geological map of the Sadiola Hill main pit and associated structural data. *Equal area 
stereonets, lower hemisphere convention. 
34

--- Page 53 ---
A distinct set of NNE- to NE-trending late diorite dikes (<2 m wide) was identified in 
the  pit  (Fig.  3).  Although  no  direct  crosscutting  relationships  could  be  observed  at 
Sadiola Hill, these dikes crosscut the quartz-feldspar-phyric felsic dikes at the Tambali 
ancillary pits, which are situated 2 km southwest of the Sadiola Hill deposit (See Fig. 
2).  
6.3.  Structural setting and geometry 
The  broad  structure  of  the  Sadiola  Hill  open  pit  is  dominated  by  the  N-S  to 
NNW-trending  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and  an  array  of  NNE-trending  shears  (Fig.  3). 
Evidence  for  a  complex  and  polyphase  ductile  to  brittle  progressive  deformation  was 
recorded in both open pit and diamond drill core. The nomenclature used in this chapter 
refers to local deformation only. 
 Ductile deformation (D1s and D2s): The earliest structural component consists of 
recumbent to sheath folds (F1) with associated low-angle thrusts (Fig. 4A). Such folding 
in impure limestones is associated with the development of a weak cleavage (S1) that is 
sub-parallel  to  bedding  and  a  gently  NNW-plunging  lineation  (L1).  This  episode  of 
deformation  remains  unconstrained  due  to  poor  exposure  and  penetrative  reworking 
during later deformation.  
The Sadiola Fracture Zone strikes NNW to N-S. It dips moderately to the west and turns 
to sub-vertical at depth (Fig. 3, 4B). It ranges in thickness from 10-50 m and consists of 
an  anastomosing  network  of  fractures  and  shears.  The  associated  pinch-and-swell 
geometry  extends  both  along  strike  and  down  dip.  Discrete  left-hand  flexures  are 
marked by shifts in the hangingwall - footwall contact along its strike.  
An S2 fabric oblique to the Sadiola Fracture Zone is associated with refolding (F2) of F1, 
resulting  in  a  fold  interference  pattern  (Fig.  4A).  The  F2  folds  are  disharmonic  with 
upright  to  inclined  fold  hinges.  Fold  axes  plunge  gently  (15-30°)  to  the  SSW  and  are 
associated  with  a  020°/75E  axial-planar  cleavage  indicative  of  WNW  fold-vergence 
(Fig.  3,  4B).  A  number  of  NNE-trending  thrusts  and  high-angle  reverse  faults  are 
closely  associated  with  these  F2  folds  (Fig.  3,  4C).  Quartz-feldspar-phyric  dikes  are 
spatially  associated  with  these  faults  and  intrude  axial-planar  to  F2  folds.  Steeply-
plunging parasitic folds occur in transposed impure limestones that are located <50  m 
35

--- Page 54 ---
from the Sadiola Fracture Zone. They are distinct from typical F2 folds and exhibit an S-
shaped asymmetry indicative of a component of sinistral displacement along the main 
structure  (Fig.  3,  4D).  A  drag  pattern  of  the  F2  folds  into  the  main  structure  was  also 
mapped in the open pit and correlates with F2 folds re-orienting along a N-S axis. 
Brittle  deformation  (D3s):  A  brittle  overprint  was  recorded  in  outcrop  and  drill 
core  and  is  associated  with  sinistral  reactivation  of  the  NNE-trending  high-angle 
structures and the Sadiola Fracture Zone as well as sinistral slip along S2 planar fabric 
(D3s) (Fig. 3, 4C). Importantly, a few NNE-trending fault planes in direct proximity to 
or  within  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  display  oblique  slickenfibres  indicating  sinistral-
normal displacement (Fig. 3, 4E). This episode of deformation is linked to the bulk of 
mineralization on the basis of field relationships and micro-textural observations.  
Late  brittle  deformation  (D4s  and  D5s):  Following  D3s,  a  set  of  late  barren 
extensional quartz veins (<30 cm wide) was preferentially developed in greywackes and 
quartz-feldspar-phyric  dikes  (Fig.  3,  4F).  The  general  orientation  of  these  veins  is 
240°/65°NW. These veins trend at an angle to S2 and transect F2 folds. A late generation 
of WNW-trending sub-vertical brittle faults crosscuts all previously described structures 
(Fig. 3, 4G). These faults range from 10 cm to over 10 m wide and contain fault gouge 
and  clasts  of  country  rocks.  Slickenfibres  kinematic  indicators  measured  in  the  pit 
indicate an oblique dextral-normal displacement.   
Figure  4.  Sadiola  Hill  structural  context:  A)  Interference  pattern  resulting  from  refolding  of 
recumbent F1 by upright F2 folds. B) Typical field observation of F2 folding in impure limestones 
looking  down  stretching  lineation.  The  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  (SFZ)  is  indicated  to  provide 
additional  structural  context.  C)  Bench  view  in  the  central  part  of  the  pit  illustrating  the 
relationship  between  F2  folds,  thrusts  and  high-angle  sinistral  shears.  D)  Steeply  north-plunging 
parasitic folds in transposed impure limestones located <50 m east off the Sadiola Fracture Zone. 
The S-shaped fold asymmetry indicates sinistral movement along the main shear. E) NNE-trending 
fault  wall  in  proximity  to  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  displays  slickenfibres  indicating  oblique 
sinistral-normal  movement.  White  arrow  indicates  apparent  movement  of  missing  block. 
Slickenfibres consist in calcite and chlorite (after biotite?) together with rusty sulfides (e.g., pyrite). 
F) NE-trending extensional quartz vein cutting across greywacke. G) Late cross-fault; fault breccia 
consists of impure limestone clasts and dolomite infill.  
36

--- Page 55 ---
37

--- Page 56 ---
6.4. 
 Deposit-scale gold distribution  
Leapfrog® was used to produce a three-dimensional rendering of the assay data 
(combined grade control and exploration) in order to better visualize and evaluate trends 
both within and surrounding the Sadiola deposit orebody. The bulk of the ore is hosted 
within the brittle-ductile Sadiola Fracture Zone and footwall impure carbonates (Fig. 5). 
Mineralization also occurs along the array of NNE-trending shears, although gold grade 
decreases  with  increasing  distance  from  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  (Fig.  5).  A  minor 
part of the ore is hosted by detrital sedimentary rocks, quartz-feldspar-porphyries, and 
diorites within the Sadiola Fracture Zone and along the NNE-trending shears. The bulk 
of  the  ore  is  concentrated  in  the  southern  half  of  the  pit  and  correlates  with  an 
approximately  45°  south-dipping  high-grade  ore  shoot  identified  on  a  longitudinal 
section  (Fig.  5).  Numerous  20°  to  25°  south-dipping  high-grade  ore  shoots  are  also 
indicated  on  the  surface  of  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  (Fig.  5).  Finally,  the  3D  model 
shows 
that  some  of 
these  high-grade  ore  shoots  coincide  with  a 
left-hand 
(anticlockwise) flexure of the Sadiola Fracture Zone (See Fig. 3). 
38

--- Page 57 ---
Figure  5.  Leapfrog®  scenes  illustrate  structural  controls  on  ore  shoot  geometry.  Data  includes 
combined grade control and exploration assay data. Color-scaled assay value bar is equivalent for 
both scenes. Note the high grades map out the NNE-trending shears and the Sadiola Fracture Zone 
in plan view. Also note that south-plunging high grade ore shoots are identified in the longitudinal 
section.  
39

--- Page 58 ---
6.5.  Ore styles and textures 
Mineralization may be associated with sulfides aligned along the shear fabric in 
host  rocks  and  with  disseminated  sulfides  in  hydrothermal-tectonic  breccias,  which 
together  define  about  50%  of  the  ore.  Ore  minerals  are  quite  diverse,  but  their 
volumetric proportions are typically low in each rock type, ranging from approximately 
0.5-3  %  sulfides.  On  the  basis  of  diamond  core  logging,  fabrics  displaying  a  greater 
degree of deformation correlate with higher sulfide and gold abundances. About 25% of 
the  ore  occurs  in  the  form  of  fine-grained  disseminated  sulfides  in  footwall  impure 
limestones,  where  the  distribution  of  sulfides  is  controlled  by  the  abundance  of 
argillaceous-silty  laminae.  Another  20%  of  the  ore  is  present  as  biotite-calcite-
tourmaline-quartz veins, with sulfides largely confined to the vein walls. Scattered and 
variably-oriented sulfide veinlets and stringers comprise the remaining 5 % of the ore.  
A range of ductile to brittle ore textures is observed at the Sadiola Hill deposit. Brittle 
textures  are  well-developed  in  the  steeply-dipping  segments  of  the  Sadiola  Fracture 
Zone,  whereas  ductile  textures  are  best-observed  in  the  moderately-dipping  segments 
(Fig.  6).  The  bedding  angular  relationship  that  is  observed  in  cross-section  between 
footwall  impure  limestones  and  hangingwall  detrital  sedimentary  rocks  corresponds 
with the change in dip of the Sadiola Fracture Zone at depth (Fig. 6).  
Ductile textures are best-observed in the diorite dikes within the Sadiola Fracture Zone, 
where  fine-grained  sulfides  are  consistently  aligned  parallel  to  the  shear  fabric  (Fig. 
7A).  Sheared  greywackes  in  the  hangingwall  of  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  exhibit  a 
well-defined fabric marked by sulfides, and by lenses and augen-shaped pods of quartz 
reflecting deformation of early quartz veins (Fig. 7B). Gold grades in the ductile part of 
the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  are  commonly  >10  g/t.  Ductile  textures  are  also  observed 
along  the  NNE-trending  shears  in  deformed  quartz-feldspar-phyric  dikes.  The  dikes 
exhibit  a  distinct  foliation  marked  by  arsenopyrite  crystals  and  are  associated  with 
strong  stretching.  Quartz  porphyroclasts  are  strained  and  polycrystalline,  whereas 
feldspar  porphyroclasts,  more  resistant  to  deformation,  exhibit  strain  shadows.  Shear 
sense indicators in oriented thin sections, such as strain shadow, mica fish, and sigma-
shaped porphyroclasts, are compatible with sinistral shearing along S2.  
40

--- Page 59 ---
Brittle textures are best-observed in deep footwall impure limestones within the Sadiola 
Fracture  Zone  (Fig.  7C-D).  They  consist  of  randomly  oriented  dolomite  veinlets-
stockworks,  patchy  biotite,  and  crackle  breccias  commonly  sealed  by  sulfides.  These 
hydrothermal-tectonic breccias are responsible for wide zones of low to medium grade 
mineralization that average 1 to 3 g/t Au. 
41

--- Page 60 ---
Figure  6.  Cross-section  through  the  southern  portion  of  the  deposit  showing  the  geometry  of  the 
Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and  deep  ore  body  (scale  1:2700).  The  main  structure  ranges  in  thickness 
from 10 to over 50 m and consists of an anastomosing network of brittle fracture and ductile shear. 
Interpretative  notes  illustrate  the Sadiola  Hill  model  whereby sinistral  shearing associated  with a 
normal component of movement results in enhanced dilation on steeper segments of the fault. 
42

--- Page 61 ---
Figure 7. Mineralization styles and ore textures in drill core. A) Sheared diorite within the Sadiola 
Fracture  Zone.  Up  to  3%  pyrrhotite  and  arsenopyrite  crystals  are  aligned  parallel  to  the  shear 
fabric  marked  by  biotite  and  calcite.  B)  Sheared  hangingwall  greywacke  that  exhibits  a  well-
defined  fabric  marked  by  biotite  and  sulfides,  and  by  lenses  and  augen-shaped  pods  of  quartz 
reflecting  deformation  of  early  quartz  veins.  C)  Calc-silicate-bearing  limestone  breccia.  The 
actinolite-tremolite dark green clots are overprinted by the potassic alteration assemblage. Pyrite is 
mantling  the  retrograde-altered  clots.  D)  Typical  carbonate  breccia.  The  rock  is  strongly  altered 
with  patchy  dolomite  and  biotite.  Fine-grained  pyrrhotite  and  arsenopyrite  crystals  occur 
disseminated and as thin stringers. 
6.6.  Hydrothermal alteration 
Based  on  diagnostic 
textural  and  mineralogical  features,  a  polyphase 
hydrothermal  alteration  history  has  been  identified  at  Sadiola  Hill.  An  early  high-
temperature phase is recorded by the porphyroblastic growth of actinolite-tremolite. In 
drill  core,  this  alteration  phase  is  characterised  by  dark  green  clots  and  box-shaped 
spots, millimetric to centimetric in size (≤1 cm). Actinolite-tremolite porphyroblasts are 
locally strongly developed within the Sadiola Fracture Zone and to a lesser extent along 
the  NNE-trending  faults  (Fig.  8A).  This  assemblage  has  been  observed  in  silty-
argillaceous interbeds in limestones, in greywackes and as rare occurrences in the early 
diorite. Such clots are superimposed on the bedding-parallel foliation in footwall impure 
limestones,  but  are  stretched  along  the  shear  fabric  within  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone. 
Deep  drilling  has  not  indicated  zoning  surrounding  any  of  the  intrusions,  but  it  does 
show  a  strong  correlation  between  the  early  alteration  assemblage  and  the  Sadiola 
Fracture  Zone  and  NNE-trending  shears.  Zones  altered  with  actinolite-tremolite  clots 
have  been  identified  up  to  200  m  away  from  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  in  footwall 
43

--- Page 62 ---
impure  limestones  and  up  to  100  m  away  in  less  reactive  hangingwall  detrital 
sedimentary  rocks.  The  early  alteration  phase  is  overprinted  by  a  syn-mineralization 
potassic  alteration  stage  at  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  (Fig.  8A-C).  Arsenopyrite, 
pyrrhotite,  pyrite,  native  gold,  aurostibite,  and  a  wide  range  of  accessory  minerals  are 
texturally  associated  with  minerals  precipitated  during  this  phase.  The  assemblage  is 
dominated by biotite-(phlogopite), calcite-dolomite, and quartz, with minor tourmaline, 
actinolite-tremolite,  muscovite,  and  K-feldspar,  and  accessory  titanite,  rutile,  apatite, 
and fluorite. Despite the early calc-silicate and the potassic mineral assemblages being 
locally  spatially  associated  and  exhibiting  gradual  to  sharp  alteration  fronts  with  the 
country  rocks,  economic  gold  grades  are  only  located  in  areas  where  the  potassic 
alteration is present.  
Biotite  marks  the  fabric  in  host  rocks  within  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and  along  the 
NNE-trending shears (Fig. 8D). The potassic alteration halo in country rocks occurs in 
the  form  of  pervasive  biotite  and  extends  beyond  the  extent  of  the  current  open  pit. 
Biotite  minerals  are  also  developed  along  axial-planar  fabric  associated  with  F2  folds 
(Fig. 8E), associated with calcite and muscovite as patchy replacement of the tremolite-
actinolite  clots,  present  as  veins  with  calcite-quartz-tourmaline-sulfides  and  in 
surrounding  wall-rocks  of  such  veins,  and  as  disseminations  in  the  argillaceous-silty 
interbeds  in  footwall  limestones.  The  type  of  mica  in  the  alteration  assemblages  is,  at 
least in part, lithologically-controlled. Within the basal impure carbonates, phlogopite is 
dominant  over  biotite.  Muscovite  is  preferentially  developed  instead  of  biotite  in  the 
quartz-feldspar-phyric dikes and commonly occurs in strain shadows with quartz (Fig. 
8F).  
In addition to calcite in the veins, carbonate alteration occurs in a 15-75 m wide zone in 
the greywackes of the immediate hangingwall to the Sadiola Fracture Zone. Texturally-
referred to as “calcite eye bands”, this alteration texture is defined by rounded clots of 
calcite locally stretched along the foliation. The disseminated carbonate spots change to 
intense  pervasive  carbonate  flooding  of  the  greywackes  within  the  Sadiola  Fracture 
Zone.  
44

--- Page 63 ---
Figure  8.  Representative  micrographs  of  ore-related  hydrothermal  alteration.  A)  Calc-silicate-
bearing  impure  metalimestone.  Relict  Ca-amphibole  clots  are  retrograde-altered  by  a  muscovite-
biotite-calcite-sulfides mineral assemblage. B) Biotite-sulfides mark the foliation and overprint an 
earlier  alteration  stage  characterized  by  the  porphyroblastic  growth  of  fibrous  actinolite.  C) 
Phlogopite  marks  the  spaced  cleavage  in  dolomitic  host  rock  and  overprints  abundant  ghost 
tremolite fibres.  D)  Biotite flakes  mark the  spaced  cleavage  and  are  stretched  along  it  in  sheared 
metadiorite. E) Biotite-sulfides occur axial-planar to an early calcite vein folded by F2. F) Muscovite 
is  closely  associated  with  arsenopyrite  crystals 
in  sheared  quartz-feldspar-phyric  dike. 
Arsenopyrite  crystals  exhibit  asymmetrical  quartz-muscovite  strain  shadows,  which  indicate  a 
sinistral  shear  sense  along  the  S2  cleavage.  The  section  was  cut  perpendicular  to  foliation  and 
parallel to lineation. 
45

--- Page 64 ---
Tourmaline  is  structurally-controlled  and  occurs  as  a  euhedral,  rod-  and  heart-shaped 
accessory mineral (up to 2%). Tourmaline is observed in quartz-calcite-biotite veins and 
in narrow selvages of such veins, as acicular masses and heart-shaped mineral sections 
along shear fabric in the Sadiola Fracture Zone, and as part of the alteration envelope 
surrounding  the  NNE-trending  shears.  Tourmaline  grains  either  display  no  chemical 
zoning  or  a  core-and-rim  texture  (Fig.  9A-B).  Two  styles  of  occurrence  have  been 
studied under electron microprobe: (a) tourmaline grains orientated parallel to the shear 
fabric in impure carbonate and (b) tourmaline crystals on the selvages of quartz-calcite-
biotite  veins.  Electron  probe  micro-analyses  (supplementary  material)  show  that  these 
tourmalines  dominantly  belong  to  the  alkali  group  and  the  schorl-dravite  series, 
similarly to that identified in the Loulo district (Fig. 9C-D). Zoned tourmalines from the 
veins  display a chemical zoning pattern  that features  a  core-to-rim decrease  in Al  and 
Mg  and  an  increase  in  Fe  and  Ca.  They  also  plot  along  the  oxydravite-povondraite 
compositional trend (meta-evaporite tie line) (Fig. 9D). 
A  final  stage  of  hydrothermal  alteration  recognized  at  Sadiola  Hill  is  associated  with 
normal  displacement  of  the  reactivated  ore-hosting  structures  and  formation  of 
numerous chlorite-calcite-pyrite veins. Based on textural relationships, these veins post-
date the potassic alteration stage and, by implication, the main mineralization phase. 
46

--- Page 65 ---
Figure  9.  A)  Micrograph  of  zoned  hydrothermal  tourmalines  in  a  quartz-calcite-biotite  vein  in 
diorite. B) Hydrothermal tourmalines in sheared impure limestone. C-D) Representative chemical 
composition of syn-mineralization stage hydrothermal tourmalines were analysed by electron probe 
and the stoichiometry calculated using the Winclastour software (Yavuz et al., 2006). Ternary plots 
show the classification of tourmalines at Sadiola Hill deposit. Shaded areas show the composition of 
multistage hydrothermal tourmaline from the Loulo deposits (Yalea North, Gara, P-129, P-64 and 
Gounkoto;  modified  from  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  Classification  based  on  the  X-site  occupancy, 
using  the  Ca-X-site  vacancy-Na  +  (K)  diagram  of  Hawthorne  and  Henry  (1999).  Classification 
based  on  Y-  and  Z-site  occupancy,  using  the  Al-Fe-Mg  ternary  diagram  of  Henry  and  Guidotti 
(1985). Labeled fields: 1. Li-rich granitoid pegmatites and aplites. 2. Li-poor granitoids pegmatites 
and  aplites.  3.  Fe3+-rich  quartz-tourmaline  rocks  (altered  granitoids).  4.  Metapelites  and 
metapsammites with Al-saturating phase. 5. Metapelites and metapsammites lacking Al-saturating 
phase. 6. Fe3+-rich quartz-tourmaline rocks, calc-silicate rocks and metapelites. 7. Low Ca meta-
ultramafic  rocks  and  Cr-V-rich  metasedimentary  rocks.  8.  Metacarbonates  and  metapyroxenites. 
*Meta-evaporite tie line after Henry et al., 2008.  
47

--- Page 66 ---
6.7.  Ore mineralogy  
Ore minerals are texturally associated with silicate minerals precipitated during 
the  potassic  alteration  phase.  The  metal  enrichment  association  of  the  primary  ore 
typically  comprises  As-Au-Sb  and  minor  W-Mo-Ag-Bi-Cu-Zn-Pb-Te.  Studies  of  ore 
mineralogy suggest a multistage ore paragenesis consisting of an early As-rich sulfide 
stage (Stage I), followed by an Au-Sb stage (Stage II). Both ore stages overlap with the 
potassic alteration event. A summary of the ore and alteration paragenesis is presented 
in Figure 10. Chemical compositions of representative ore minerals and gold are given 
in the supplementary material. 
Stage I produced a sulfide assemblage characterized by arsenopyrite + pyrrhotite 
± pyrite, chalcopyrite, and native gold (Fig. 11A). Arsenopyrite is the dominant sulfide 
phase and is mostly present as fine-grained euhedral to subhedral, prismatic to acicular 
grains (~ 10-100 μm) and crystal aggregates (up to 250 μm). It occurs as single crystals, 
intergrown with euhedral to subhedral pyrrhotite (~ 10-150 μm) and/or subhedral pyrite 
(~  5-125  μm).  Minor  ore  phases  include  fine-grained  chalcopyrite  (~  2-75  μm), 
scheelite,  and  molybdenite.  Scheelite  is  preferentially  deposited  in  limestones 
suggesting  a  dependence  on  host  rock  composition  and  reactivity.  Molybdenite  is 
present in trace amounts as needles and subhedral crystal aggregates, up to 300 μm in 
length, and enclosed in scheelite and pyrite.  
Gold associated with stage I accounts for a minor part of the recovered gold (~20 % of 
the  ore)  and  occurs  as  fine  inclusions  (~1  μm)  enclosed  in  arsenopyrite  crystals,  as 
grains  (~1-10  μm)  nucleated  on  sulfide  margins,  or  as  fine-grained  blebs  (15<  μm) 
within  the  gangue  closely  associated  with  the  sulfides  (Fig.  11B).  The  LA-ICPMS 
technique  indicates  that  gold  is  preferentially  concentrated  in  arsenopyrite  between 
0.126 - 23.7 ppm with a mean of 3.02 ppm. Gold concentration in pyrite is insignificant 
(mean  of  0.15  ppm).  The  sub-microscopic  gold  is  heterogeneously  distributed  within 
individual  arsenopyrite  crystals.  Antimony  is  also  concentrated  in  arsenopyrite  at  a 
mean of 1368 ppm, with variations reflected by patchy compositional zoning on a scale 
of  tens  of  microns  to  1  µm.  Variations  in  Ni,  Co,  Bi,  and  Se  concentrations  of 
arsenopyrite hosted in impure limestone versus in quartz-feldspar-phyric dikes indicate 
a lithological control on trace element content of arsenopyrite. Chemical compositions 
48

--- Page 67 ---
of selected arsenopyrite grains (>45 μm in size, no zoning) buffered by pyrrhotite and/or 
pyrite (n = 20) and determined by electron microprobe vary from 30.06 to 31.63 atomic 
%  As.  Using 
the  ƒS2-buffered  arsenopyrite-pyrite-pyrrhotite  equilibrium, 
this 
compositional  range  suggests  crystallization  temperatures  greater  than  300°C  (i.e. 
between  300°C  and  410°C)  for  stage  I  arsenopyrite  crystals,  with  an  average 
crystallization temperature of 350°C (30.78 atomic % As).  
Stage  II  is  characterized  by  the  abundance  of  antimony  sulfosalts  and  the 
assemblage pyrrhotite + berthierite + tetrahedrite + stibnite ± native gold and aurostibite 
(Fig. 11C). Fine-grained berthierite (~ 2-75 μm) was observed attached to the margins 
of  arsenopyrite  and  pyrrhotite,  enclosing  arsenopyrite/pyrite/pyrrhotite,  and  as  rare 
inclusion in pyrrhotite/pyrite. Stibnite is closely associated with berthierite, but typically 
appears late in the paragenetic sequence. Tetrahedrite (~ 15-25 μm, up to 250 μm) was 
observed  on  the  margins  of  arsenopyrite-pyrrhotite-pyrite  or  as  intergrain  space  infill. 
Chemical  analyses  give  tetrahedrite90-100tennantite0-10  compositions  (Cu-Sb-rich  end 
member  in  the  solid-solution  series),  although  intermediate  compositions  with 
tennantite (Cu-As-rich end member) were measured. Analyzed tetrahedrite grains may 
contain  up  to  5  wt%  Ag  and  6  wt%  Zn.  Accessory  sphalerite  occurs  as  intergrowths 
with  pyrrhotite  and  contains  acicular  arsenopyrite  inclusions.  Accessory  antimony 
sulfosalts of Pb and Ni (e.g. gudmundite, ullmannite, jamesonite) deposited very late in 
the paragenetic sequence. 
Gold associated with stage II accounts for the bulk of the recovered gold (~80 % of the 
ore). It occurs as free native gold blebs (~5-25 μm) within the gangue closely associated 
with Sb sulfosalts (Fig. 11D), as polygonal grains (~1-10 μm) attached to the margins of 
tetrahedrite  crystals,  as  aurostibite  (AuSb2)  (~5-20  μm)  at  sharp  crystal  faces  with 
and/or  mantling  native  gold  blebs  (Fig.  11E),  as  late  infill  and  locally  remobilized 
particles  in  micro-fissures  in  arsenopyrite  crystals  (Fig.  11F),  and  as  rare  maldonite 
crystals (Au2Bi) (~25 μm) intergrown with chalcopyrite crystals.  
49

--- Page 68 ---
A  suite  of  minerals  generally  observed  near  the  oxide-fresh  transition  zone 
formed  by  weathering  of  the  hypogene  ore  and  include  native  antimony,  marcasite, 
hematite, and gudmundite. Pyrrhotite is replaced by a porous or skeletal intergrowth of 
pyrite  and  marcassite.  Native  antimony  is  observed  as  rare  anhedral  particles  infilling 
microcracks  in  arsenopyrite.  Pyrrhotite  and  berthierite  also  display  rare  embayments 
and  digitations  filled  by  native  antimony  suggesting  breakdown  or  replacement 
reactions. Gudmundite is associated with apparent breakdown textures after pyrrhotite, 
berthierite, and tetrahedrite. 
50

--- Page 69 ---
Figure 10. Ore and alteration paragenetic sequence chart for Sadiola Hill. The ore-related phases 
correspond  to  both  the  dominant  disseminated  style  and  minor  veining  styles  of  mineralization 
(both  styles  formed  contemporaneously).  Berthierite  =  FeSb2S4;  Tetrahedrite  =  (Cu,Fe)12Sb4S13; 
Aurostibite = AuSb2; Stibnite = Sb2S3; Ullmannite = NiSbS; Jamesonite = Pb4FeSb6S14; Maldonite = 
Au2Bi; Tellurobismuthite (Bi2Te3).  
51

--- Page 70 ---
Figure  11.  Reflected  light  images  of  ore-related  phases  at  Sadiola  Hill.  A)  Typical  early  sulfide 
assemblage  consists  of  euhedral  prismatic  to  acicular  arsenopyrite,  subhedral  pyrrhotite,  minor 
pyrite  and  traces  chalcopyrite.  B)  Free  gold  grains  within  the  gangue  closely  associated  with  the 
early sulfide mineral assemblage. C) Early sulfide mineral assemblage overprinted by berthierite. 
Berthierite  is  mantling  a  pyrrhotite  crystal  and  also  occurs  as  filling  inter-arsenopyrite  grains. 
Embayments in berthierite are filled by native antimony. D) Native gold, aurostibite and berthierite 
are  closely  associated  with  arsenopyrite  and  pyrrhotite.  E)  Aurostibite  occurs  as  disseminated 
crystals,  intergrown  at  sharp  crystal  faces  with  native  gold  or  mantling  the  latter.  F)  Native  gold 
particles in micro-fissures in arsenopyrite. 
52

--- Page 71 ---
7. Discussion 
7.1. 
Integration  of  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  with  regional  geology 
and tectonics  
In  this  section,  the  local  deformation  history  identified  at  Sadiola  Hill  is 
compared to the prolonged tectono-magmatic history recorded in other Paleoproterozoic 
greenstone  belts  of  the  West  African  Craton.  At  least  two  phases  of  folding  have 
affected  the  country  rocks  in  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  area.  Little  is  known  about  the 
kinematics  of  the  earliest  local  deformation  phase  (D1s),  but  fold  geometry  and 
associated  lineation  data  are  consistent  with  NE-SW-directed  shortening.  At  the 
regional  scale,  D1s  is  compatible  with  an  early  deformation  event  (D1)  recorded  in 
southern Mali (Liégeois et al., 1991; McFarlane et al., 2011). The development of NNE-
trending upright folds and penetrative axial-planar cleavage (S2) are correlated with the 
D2s  deformation  event.  Fold  and  fault  geometries,  and  kinematic  indicators  are 
consistent  with  NW-SE-directed  shortening.  At  the  regional  scale,  D2s  is  compatible 
with  a  period  of  fold-and-thrust  tectonics  correlated  with  a  region-wide  compressive 
event  (D2)  (in  Ivory  Coast,  Pouclet  et  al.,  2006;  Vidal  et  al.,  2009;  in  Burkina  Faso, 
Hein, 2010; in Guinea, Lahondère et al., 2002; in Mali, Liégeois et al., 1991; Milési et 
al., 1992; Dabo and Aïfa, 2010; McFarlane et al., 2011; Diene et al., 2012; Lawrence et 
al.,  2013a;  Treloar  et  al.,  2014).  In  southern  Mali,  inversion  of  the  Birimian  host 
sequence is constrained to 2103 ± 14 - 2094 ± 4 Ma (Amstrong, 2003; McFarlane et al., 
2011). The D3s event marks a switch from dominantly pure shear (folding and reverse 
faulting  with  minor  strike-slip  displacement  during  D2s)  to  a  simple-shear  (strike-slip 
faulting) system (Fig. 12). Fault geometries and kinematic indicators are consistent with 
NNW-SSE-directed shortening. At the regional scale, D3s is compatible with a period of 
transcurrent  tectonics  (D3)  that  is  coeval  with  local  intrusion  of  ca.  2090  to  2070  Ma 
metaluminous,  hornblende-biotite-bearing  diorite-granodiorite  and  peraluminous,  K-
rich granite plutons (Milési et al., 1992; Egal et al., 2002; Schwartz and Melcher, 2004; 
Gueye  et  al.,  2008;  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Lawrence  et  al.  2013a;  Lambert-Smith, 
2014). The bulk of the mineralization is constrained to have taken place during D3s at 
Sadiola  Hill.  The  similarity  in  relative  timing  and  structural  setting  between  the  KKI 
53

--- Page 72 ---
and  southern  Ghana  suggests  that  gold  mineralization  within  the  Birimian  terranes  of 
West Africa occurred over a protracted interval between ca. 2100 to 2070 Ma, during a 
period of transcurrent tectonics, soon after the cessation of regional-scale contractional 
deformation  (e.g,  in  the  Ashanti  belt  of  Ghana,  Allibone  et  al.,  2002a,  b;  in  southern 
Mali,  Olson  et  al.,  1992;  McFarlane  et  al.,  2011;  in  the  KKI,  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a; 
Treloar et al., 2014). At Morila, orogenic gold mineralization has been dated at 2074 ± 
14 Ma (McFarlane et al., 2011: U-Pb on hydrothermal titanite). The structural evolution 
from early fold-and-thrust tectonics to strike-slip tectonics has been described in other 
orogenic belts (e.g. Vassallo and Wilson, 2002; Clegg and Holdsworth, 2005; Ulrich et 
al.,  2011)  and  is  typically  associated  with  gold-forming  events.  At  Sadiola  Hill,  the 
Sadiola Fracture Zone was the dominant structure active during mineralization and has 
therefore focused the greatest amount of dilation and permeability. The main ore shoots 
plunge  45°S,  indicating  that  mineralization  resulted  from  the  sinistral-normal  linkage 
between the Sadiola Fracture Zone and the NNE-trending shears (Fig. 12). Within the 
KKI, NW-SE shortening in a transpressive regime has similarly been proposed for the 
Kolia-Boboti  sedimentary  basin  (Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010;  Diene  et  al.,  2012)  and  in  a 
transtensional regime for the Loulo district (Lawrence et al., 2013a). Vein geometry and 
kinematic  indicators  associated  with  the  steep  NE-trending  barren  quartz  veins 
(240°/65°NW)  present  at  Sadiola  Hill  are  consistent  with  a  late  phase  of  NW-SE 
extension (D4s). These veins post-date mineralization. The last local deformation event 
(D5s) is associated with the formation of WNW-trending sub-vertical brittle cross-faults 
(Fig. 12). Similar late E-W faults have been reported at the Yalea deposit in the Loulo 
district  (Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  The  integration  of  D4s  and  D5s  into  the  regional 
tectonic framework remains unclear at this stage. 
54

--- Page 73 ---
55

--- Page 74 ---
Figure  12.  Schematic  bloc  diagram  succession  of  most  important  local  deformation  events  as 
recorded in the recent field study. D2s is associated with the formation of a fold and thrust belt and 
the  syn-tectonic  emplacement  of  the  quartz-feldspar-phyric  dikes.  F2  folds  orientation,  fault 
geometries and kinematic indicators are consistent with NW-SE-oriented shortening. D3s marks a 
switch  from  inverse  tectonics  to  a  strike-slip  dominated  system  under  NNW-SSE  shortening.  D3s 
also marks a transition from the ductile regime to brittle conditions. It is characterized by sinistral 
movement along both the Sadiola Fracture Zone and the NNE-trending shears, synchronous with 
the  potassic  hydrothermal  alteration  stage  and  gold  mineralization.  The  latest  recorded  event  is 
associated  with  the  formation  of  WNW-trending  sub-vertical  brittle  cross-faults  that  offset 
mineralization trends. 
7.2.  Physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  ore-forming  fluid  and 
potential controls on Au-Sb co-precipitation 
The  principal  parameters  that  are  generally  assumed  to  control  ore  mineral 
solubility, other than the activities of the aqueous metallic species, are temperature (T), 
pressure  (P),  oxygen  fugacity  (f02),  pH  and  the  total  sulphur  activity  (Σas)  (Williams-
Jones  and  Normand,  1997).  Gold  saturation  and  precipitation  at  Sadiola  Hill  is 
interpreted to have occurred predominantly in response to decompression during brittle-
ductile  failure  and  sulfidation  reactions  during  fluid  -  wall-rock  interaction.  The 
extensive brecciation recorded over the best-mineralized drill core intersects illustrates 
the enhanced and cumulative dilation that has developed along the vertical and left-hand 
flexures  of  the  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone.  The  rheological  contrasts  within  the  host 
lithologies,  the  variations  in  strain  along  the  main  shear  (dilation  vs.  shearing),  the 
occurrence of locally over-pressured fluid migration, and host rock reactivity may have 
further  favored  brecciation.  The  coexistence  of  arsenopyrite,  pyrrhotite,  and  pyrite  in 
ore  Stage  I  indicates  relatively  reducing  conditions  and  suggests  that  H2S  and/or  HS- 
ligands were responsible for transport of gold in the ore fluids (Shenberger and Barnes, 
1989;  Benning  and  Seward,  1996;  Williams-Jones  et  al.,  2009).  The  predominance  of 
pyrrhotite  and  arsenopyrite  over  pyrite  within  the  Stage  I  ore  mineral  assemblage 
reflects low sulfur activities (Thorne et al., 2008). Gold concentrations in the lattice of 
Stage I arsenopyrite crystals are too low to have an economic potential but anomalous 
concentrations  in  antimony  (i.e.  mean  of  1368  ppm)  reflect  an  early  saturation  of  the 
fluid  with  that  element.  The  precipitation  of  berthierite  followed  by  the  deposition  of 
stibnite  in  the  paragenetic  sequence  is  best-explained  through  cooling  of  the 
56

--- Page 75 ---
hydrothermal system from Stage I to Stage II (e.g., Barton, 1971; Barton and Skinner, 
1979; Williams-Jones and Normand, 1997). The Au-Sb-rich stage II is characterized by 
the  formation  of  aurostibite  and  native  gold.  Favorable  chemical  conditions  for 
aurostibite  formation  are  from  weakly  acidic  to  alkaline  conditions  and  a  low  sulfur 
reducing  environment  (Nekrasov,  1996).  The  maximum  possible  temperature  for 
formation of the gold + aurostibite mineral assemblage is 360°C (Hansen and Anderko, 
1958).  On  the  basis  of  combined  field  relationships,  mineralogical  and  micro-textural 
data, and arsenopyrite geothermometry, the multistage ore development is interpreted to 
reflect  the  cooling  continuum  of  a  high  temperature  (>400ºC)  reduced  hydrothermal 
fluid  rather  than  contrasting  mineralization  styles  developing  at  distinct  crustal  levels 
and times. Stage I and Stage II ore mineral assemblages are constrained on log f02/fS2 – T 
diagrams  (Fig.  13A,  B)  in  order  to  illustrate  the  evolution  of  the  ore-forming  fluid 
during mineralization. 
57

--- Page 76 ---
Figure  13.  A)  Log  f02  –  103/T  (K)  diagram  at  neutral  pH  and  Σas  =  0.01  showing  stability 
relationships  in  the  system  Fe-Sb-S-O  and  contours  of  antimony  mineral  solubility  in  ppm  (light 
blue lines) (after Williams-Jones and Normand, 1997). The predominant species of Sb is Sb(OH)3, 
but  at  intermediate  f02  and  temperatures  between  185  and  280˚C,  the  predominant  species  is 
Sb2S2(OH)2. The heavy dashed lines show the predominance boundaries of species in the system H-
S-O. B) Log aS2 – 103/T (K) diagram (after Thorne et al., 2008; thermodynamic fields defined using 
equations from Barton and Skinner, 1979) showing phase equilibrium constraints at Sadiola Hill. 
On both diagrams: upper stability limit of gold + aurostibite (red line i.e. 360˚C); (I) Stage I typical 
mineral assemblage: po + apy ± py; (II) Stage II typical mineral assemblage: po + brt + au + ausb ± 
stb ± tetr. Mineral abbreviations: ant  - native antimony, ausb – aurostibite, brt – berthierite, ccp – 
chalcopyrite, gud – gudmundite, he – hematite, lö – löellingite, po – pyrrhotite, py – pyrite, sen – 
senarmontite, snj – seinajokite, stb – stibnite, tetr – tetrahedrite.  
58

--- Page 77 ---
7.3.  Towards a genetic model… 
The Sadiola Hill deposit shares a number of characteristics typical of  orogenic 
gold deposits worldwide (Mikucki and Ridley, 1993; Groves et al., 1998; McCuaig and 
Kerrich, 1998; Ridley and Diamond, 2000; Bierlein and Maher, 2001; Goldfarb et al., 
2001;  Groves  et  al.,  2003;  Bierlein  et  al.,  2006)  including  a  late-orogenic  relative 
timing,  strong  regional  (i.e.,  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone)  and  local  structural  controls 
(i.e.,  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone  and  NNE-trending  shear  array)  on  ore  location  and 
geometry,  and  a  pronounced  Au-As-Sb  metal  enrichment  association.  The  metal 
enrichment  association  and  geothermometric  estimates  from  ore  and  alteration 
paragenesis are compatible with mesozonal Au-As-Te (6-12 km, 300°-475°C) to near-
epizonal Au-Sb (≤6 km, 150°-300°C) conditions in terms of crustal level based on the 
proposed classification of orogenic gold deposits by Groves et al. (1998). However, the 
high  temperature  ore  and  alteration  paragenesis  at  Sadiola  Hill  is  in  thermal 
disequilibrium  with  host  rocks  at  regional  greenschist-facies  conditions,  which  is 
atypical  for  that  class  of  deposit.  Such  geological  feature  alone  is  not  diagnostic  of  a 
magmatic fluid source because it can reflect the interaction of a fluid from any source 
with reactive country rocks at a temperature high enough to form stable actinolite and 
biotite  (Ridley  and  Diamond,  2000;  Meinert  et  al.,  2005).  Obolensky  et  al.  (2009) 
suggested  that  the  physico-chemical  parameters  of  ore-forming  fluids  associated  with 
Au-As-Sb  deposits  indicate  deep  circulation  of  hydrothermal  solutions,  which  make 
them in disequilibrium with country rocks at the ore deposition level. The late orogenic 
switch  from  fold-and-thrust  tectonics  to  strike-slip  tectonics  along  the  Senegal-Mali 
Shear  Zone  most  likely  promoted  high  fluid  flow  and  the  arrival  of  magmatic  fluids 
with minor heat loss at upper crustal levels, which is consistent with the occurrence of 
voluminous  calc-alkaline  magmatism  at  ca.  2090-2070  Ma.  The  high  temperature  ore 
and alteration paragenesis is therefore suggested to represent a transient thermal effect 
associated with syn-kinematic igneous activity at the time of mineralization. Based on 
this study and recent research by Lawrence et al. (2013a, b) and Treloar et al. (2014), a 
deposit  classification  for  major  gold  mines  in  the  KKI  is  proposed  in  Table  1.  A 
potential  analogue  to  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  is  the  Massawa  gold  deposit  in  the 
Senegalese part of the KKI. Nevertheless, the source of fluids and metals for the Sadiola 
59

--- Page 78 ---
Hill  hydrothermal  system  remains  uncertain.  Indeed,  although  a  magmatic  source  is 
indicated at Massawa (Treloar et al., 2014) and may be proposed for Sadiola Hill, gold 
deposits  of  the  Kweke  district  in  the  Archean  Midlands  greenstone  belt  of  Zimbabwe 
are  associated  with  low  salinity,  mixed  aqueous-carbonic  fluid  inclusions  and  stable 
isotope  data  indicating  a  homogeneous  metamorphic  or  mixed  metamorphic  and/or 
magmatic  fluid  source  for  both  the  Au-As  and  the  Au-Sb  mineralization  stages 
(Buchholz et al., 2007). 
8. Conclusions 
The  presented  field  and  mineralogical  data  suggest  that  the  Sadiola  Hill 
carbonate-hosted Au-As-Sb mineralization formed during a period of sinistral tectonics 
(i.e.  D3s  NNW-SSE  shortening)  that  was  coeval  with  calc-alkaline  magmatic  activity 
between ca. 2090 and 2070 Ma. The Senegal-Mali Shear Zone acted as the main conduit 
for  hydrothermal  fluids  in  the  Sadiola  camp.  The  sinistral  reactivation  of  early 
accretionary  structures,  and  their  linkage  with  belt-discordant  NNE-trending  shears, 
appears to be a critical factor controlling ore deposit location and ore shoot geometry. 
Paragenetic  studies  reveal  a  multistage  ore  development  comprising  an  early  As-rich 
sulfide  stage,  followed  by  an  Au-Sb  stage.  The  similar  gold  relative  timing  and 
structural  setting  in  the  KKI  and  southern  Ghana  (e.g.,  Ashanti,  Loulo,  Massawa, 
Sadiola  Hill)  suggests  that  gold  mineralization  within  the  Birimian  terranes  of  West 
Africa  occurred  over  a  protracted  period  of  transcurrent  tectonics,  soon  after  the 
cessation of regional-scale contractional deformation. Despite the uncertainty regarding 
the  source  of  fluids  and  metals  for  the  Sadiola  Hill  hydrothermal  system,  the  late-
Eburnean  tectono-magmatic  activity  reflects  a  transient  geodynamic  process  that  may 
have been critical for orogenic gold mineralization in the region.  
60

--- Page 79 ---
61

--- Page 81 ---
Armstrong,  R.A.,  2003,  A  Geochronological  Investigation  of  the  Morila  gold  mine,  Mali: 
Canberra,  Australian  National  University,  Research  School  of  Earth  Sciences,  Precise 
Radiogenic Isotope Services (PRISE), 25 p. 
Baratoux,  L.,  Metelka,  V.,  Naba,  S.,  Jessell,  M.W.,  Grégoire,  M.,  and  Ganne,  J.,  2011, 
Juvenile  Paleoproterozoic  crust  evolution  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (ca.  2.2–2.0 
Ga), western Burkina Faso: Precambrian Research, v. 191, p. 18-45. 
Barton, P.B., 1971, The Fe-Sb-S system: Economic Geology, v. 66, p. 121-132. 
Barton,  P.B.,  and  Skinner,  B.  J.,  1979,  Sulfide  Mineral  Stabilities,  in  Barnes,  H.L.,  ed., 
Geochemistry of Hydrothermal Ore Deposits, 2d ed., New York, Wiley, p. 278-403. 
Bassot, J. P., 1987, Le complexe volcano-plutonique calco-alcalin de la rivière Daléma (Est 
Sénégal):  discussion  de  sa  signification  géodynamique  dans  le  cadre  de  l'orogénie 
eburnéenne  (Protérozoïque  inférieur):  Journal  of  African  Earth  Sciences,  v.  6,  p.  505-
519. 
Bassot,  J.  P.,  1997,  Albitisations  dans  le  Paléoprotérozoïque  de  l'Est  sénégal:  relations  avec 
les  minéralisations  ferriféres  de  la  rive  gauche  de  la  Falémé:  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences, v. 25, p. 353-367. 
Bassot,  J.  P.,  and  Caen-Vachette,  M.,  1984,  Données  géochronologiques  et  géochimiques 
nouvelles sur les granitoïdes de l'Est du Sénégal: Implications sur l'histoire géologique 
du  Birimien  de  cette  région,  in  Klerkx,  J.,  and  Michot,  J.,  eds.,  African  Geology: 
Belgium, Tervuren, p. 196-209. 
Benning,  L.G.,  and  Seward,  T.M.,  1996,  Hydrosulphide  complexing  of  Au  (I)  in 
hydrothermal  solutions 
from  150-400°C  and  500-1500  bar:  Geochimica  et 
Cosmochimica Acta, v. 60, p. 1849-1871.  
Bessoles, B., 1977, Géologie de l’Afrique, le craton ouest-africain. Mémoire BRGM 88. 
Bierlein, F.P., Groves, D.I., Goldfarb, R.J., and Dubé, B., 2006, Lithospheric controls on the 
formation  of  provinces  hosting  giant  orogenic  gold  deposits:  Mineralium  Deposita,  v. 
40, p. 874-886. 
Bierlein, F.P., and  Maher, S., 2001, Orogenic disseminated gold in phanerozoic fold belts — 
examples from Victoria, Australia and elsewhere: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 18, p. 113-
148. 
Boher,  M.,  Abouchami,  W.,  Michard,  A.,  Albarede,  F.,  and  Arndt,  N.  T.,  1992,  Crustal 
Growth in West Africa at 2.1 Ga: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 97, p. 345-369. 
63

--- Page 82 ---
Boshoff, F., Hanssen, E., Hill, J.V., Jones, D., Kaisin, J., Traore, S., and  Voet, H.W., 1998, 
The Sadiola Hill mine: a lower Proterozoic gold deposit in the Kenieba window, Mali, 
West  Africa.  Unpublished  internal  report  to the  Société  d'Exploitation  des  Mines  d'Or 
de Sadiola S.A. (SEMOS), 6 p. 
Buchholz,  P.,  Oberthür,  T.,  Lüders,  V.,  and  Wilkinson,  J.,  2007,  Multistage  Au-As-Sb 
Mineralization  and  Crustal-Scale  Fluid  Evolution  in  the  Kwekwe  District,  Midlands 
Greenstone Belt, Zimbabwe: A Combined Geochemical, Mineralogical, Stable Isotope, 
and Fluid Inclusion Study: Economic Geology, v. 102, p. 347-378. 
Calvez,  J.Y.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  and  Milesi,  J.P.,  1990.  Géochronologie  du 
Proterozoique  inferieur  du  craton  ouest  africain  (methode  d’évaporation  directe  de 
zircons  isolés):  Conference  proceedings  -  13e  Réunion  des  Sciences  de  la  Terre, 
Grenoble,  France;  in  Milési,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  Dommanget,  A., 
Quedraogo, M.F., Marcoux, E., Prost, A., Vinchon, C., Sylvain, J.P., Johan, V., Tegyey, 
M.,  Calvez,  J.Y.,  and  Lagny,  P.,  1989,  Les  minéralisations  aurifères  de  l’Afrique  de 
l’Ouest  et  leurs  relations  avec  l’évolution  lithostructurale  au  Protérozoique  inférieur: 
Chronique de la Recherche Minière, v. 497, p. 3-98. 
Clegg, P. and Holdsworth, R.E., 2005, Complex deformation as a result of strain partitioning 
in transpression zones: an example from the Leinster Terrane, SE Ireland: Journal of the 
Geological Society, London, v. 162, p. 187–202. 
Dabo,  M.,  and  Aïfa,  T.,  2011,  Late  Eburnean  deformation  in  the  Kolia-Boboti  sedimentary 
basin,  Kédougou-Kéniéba  Inlier,  Senegal:  Journal  of  African  Earth  Sciences,  v.  60,  p. 
106-116. 
Dabo,  M.,  and  Aïfa,  T.,  2010,  Structural  styles  and  tectonic  evolution  of  the  Kolia-Boboti 
sedimentary  Basin,  Kédougou-Kéniéba  inlier,  eastern  Senegal:  Comptes  Rendus 
Geoscience, v. 342, p. 796-805. 
Debat, P., Diallo, D.P., Ngom, P.M., Rollet, M., and Seyler, M., 1984, La série de Mako dans 
ses parties centrale et méridionale (Sénégal Oriental, Afrique de l'ouest). Précisions sur 
l'évolution  de  la  série  volcanosédimentaire  et  données  géochimiques  préliminaires  sur 
les formations magmatiques post-tectoniques: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 2, p. 
71-79. 
Dia, A., 1988, Caractéres et signification des complexes magmatiques et métamorphiques du 
secteur  de  Sandikounda-Laminia  (Nord  de  la  boutonnière  de  Kédougou,  Est  du 
64

--- Page 83 ---
Sénégal):  un  modèle  géodynamique  du  Birimien  de  l'Afrique  de  l'Ouest:  Unpublished 
Ph.D. thesis, Sénégal, Université de Dakar, 350 p. 
Dia,  A.,  Van  Schmus,  W.R.,  and  Kröner,  A.,  1997,  Isotopic  constraints  on  the  age  and 
formation of a Palaeoproterozoic volcanic arc complex in the Kedougou Inlier, eastern 
Senegal, West Africa: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 24, p. 197-213. 
Diene, M., Gueye, M., Diallo, D.P., and Dia, A., 2012, Structural Evolution of a Precambrian 
Segment:  Example  of  the  Paleoproterozoic  Formations  of  the  Mako  Belt  (Eastern 
Senegal, West Africa): International Journal of Geosciences, v. 03, p. 153-165. 
Dioh,  E.,  Béziat,  D.,  Debat,  P.,  Grégoire,  M.,  and  Ngom,  P.M.,  2006,  Diversity  of  the 
Palaeoproterozoic  granitoids  of  the  Kédougou  inlier  (eastern  Sénégal):  Petrographical 
and geochemical constraints: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 44, p. 351-371. 
Egal,  E.,  Thiéblemont,  D.,  Lahondère,  D.,  Guerrot,  C.,  Costea,  C.A.,  Iliescu,  D.,  Delor,  C., 
Goujou, J.C., Lafon, J.M., Tegyey, M., Diaby, S., and Kolié, P., 2002, Late Eburnean 
granitization  and  tectonics  along  the  western  and  northwestern  margin  of  the  Archean 
Kénéma – Man domain (Guinea, West African Craton): Precambrian Research, v. 117. 
P. 57-84. 
Feybesse, J.L., Billa, M., Guerrot, C., Duguey, E., Lescuyer, J.L., Milesi, J.P., and Bouchot, 
V.,  2006,  The  paleoproterozoic  Ghanaian  province:  Geodynamic  model  and  ore 
controls, including regional stress modeling: Precambrian Research, v. 149, p. 149-196. 
Fougerouse,  D.,  Micklethwaite,  S.,  Ulrich,  S.,  Miller,  J.,  Godel,  B.,  Adams,  D.,  McCuaig, 
T.C.,  2015,  Evidence  for  two  stages  of  mineralization  in  West  Africa’s  largest  gold 
deposit: Obuasi, Ghana: Economic Geology, this volume.  
Goldfarb, R.J., Groves, D.I., and Gardoll, S., 2001, Orogenic gold and geologic time: a global 
synthesis: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 18, p. 1-75. 
Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Gebre-Mariam,  M.,  Hagemann,  S.G.,  and  Robert,  F.,  1998, 
Orogenic  gold  deposits:  A  proposed  classification  in  the  context  of  their  crustal 
distribution and relationship to other gold deposit types: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 13, p. 
7-27. 
Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Robert,  F.,  and  Hart,  C.J.R.,  2003,  Gold  Deposits  in 
Metamorphic Belts: Overview of Current Understanding,Outstanding Problems, Future 
Research, and Exploration Significance: Economic Geology, v. 98, p. 1-29. 
Gueye, M., Ngom, P.M., Diène, M., Thiam, Y., Siegesmund, S., Wemmer, K., and  Pawlig, 
S.,  2008,  Intrusive  rocks  and 
tectono-metamorphic  evolution  of 
the  Mako 
65

--- Page 84 ---
Paleoproterozoic  belt  (Eastern  Senegal,  West  Africa):  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences, v. 50, p. 88-110. 
Gueye,  M.,  Siegesmund,  S.,  Wemmer,  K.,  Pawlig,  S.,  Drobe,  M.,  Nolte,  N.,  and  Layer,  P., 
2007,  New  evidence  for  an  early  Birimian  evolution  in  the  West  African  Craton:  An 
example  from  the  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  southeast  Senegal:  South  African  Journal 
of Geology, v. 110, p. 511-534. 
Hansen,  M.,  and  Anderko,  L.,  1958,  Sulfide  Mineral  Stabilitites,  in  Barnes,  H.L.,  ed., 
Geochemistry of Hydrothermal Ore Deposits, 2d ed., New York, Wiley, p. 302-303. 
Hawthorne,  F.C.,  and  Henry,  D.J.,  1999,  Classification  of  the  minerals  of  the  tourmaline 
group: European Journal of Mineralogy, v. 11, p. 201–215. 
Hein,  K.A.A.,  2010,  Succession  of  structural  events  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  (Burkina 
Faso): Implications for West African tectonics: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 56, 
p. 83-94. 
Henry,  D.J.,  and  Guidotti,  C.V.,  1985,  Tourmaline  as  a  petrogenetic  indicator  mineral-  an 
example from the staurolite-grade metapelites of NW Maine: American Mineralogist, v. 
70, p. 1–15. 
Hirdes, W., and Davis, D.W., 2002, U–Pb Geochronology of Paleoproterozoic Rocks in the 
Southern  Part  of  the  Kedougou-Kéniéba  Inlier,  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Evidence  for 
Diachronous  Accretionary  Development  of  the  Eburnean  Province:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 118, p. 83-99. 
IAMGold, 2015, IAMGold Corporation Operations: Sadiola Gold Mine, Mali. Accessed from 
http://www. Iamgold.com/English/Operations/Operating-Mines/SadiolaGoldMine/ 
Klöckner,  I.,  1989,  Notice  explicative  de  la  carte  géologique  du  Mali  occidental,  Direction 
Nationale de la Géologie et des Mines, Ministère de l'industrie, République du Mali. 
Kretschmar,  U.,  and  Scott,  S.D.,  1976,  Phase  relations  involving  arsenopyrite  in  the  system 
Fe-As-S and their application: Canadian Mineralogist, v. 14, p. 364-386. 
Lahondère,  D.,  Thiéblemont,  D.,  Tegyey,  M.,  Guerrot,  C.,  and  Diabate,  B.,  2002,  First 
evidence of early Birimian (2.21 Ga) volcanic activity in Upper Guinea: The volcanics 
and associated rocks of the Niani suite: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 35, p. 417–
431. 
Lambert-Smith, J., 2014, The geology, structure and metallogenesis of the world class Loulo-
Bambadji  Au  district  in  Mali  and  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Ph.D  Thesis,  Kingston 
University, London, 346 p. 
66

--- Page 85 ---
Lawrence,  D.M.,  2010,  Characterization  and  evolution  of  Au  mineralization  in  the  Loulo 
mining district, western Mali: Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, London, Kingston University, 
341 p. 
Lawrence, D.M., Treloar, P. J., Rankin, A.H., Boyce, A., and  Harbidge, P., 2013b, A Fluid 
Inclusion  and  Stable  Isotope  Study  at  the  Loulo  Mining  District,  Mali,  West  Africa: 
Implications  for  Multifluid  Sources  in  the  Generation  of  Orogenic  Gold  Deposits: 
Economic Geology, v. 108, p. 229-257. 
Lawrence,  D.M.,  Treloar,  P.J.,  Rankin,  A.H.,  Harbidge,  P.,  and  Holliday,  J.,  2013a,  The 
Geology and Mineralogy of the Loulo Mining District, Mali, West Africa: Evidence for 
Two  Distinct  Styles  of  Orogenic  Gold  Mineralization:  Economic  Geology,  v.  108,  p. 
199-227. 
Lebrun,  E.,  Miller,  J.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Ulrich,  S.,  and  McCuaig,  C.,  2015,  The  world-class 
Siguiri  gold  district,  Siguiri  Basin,  Guinea  (West  Africa):  Stress  switches  within  an 
orogenic gold system: Economic geology, this volume.  
Ledru, P., Pons, J., Milesi, J.P., Feybesse, J. L., and Johan, V., 1991, Transcurrent tectonics 
and  polycyclic  evolution  in  the  Lower  proterozoic  of  Senegal-Mali:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 50, p. 337-354. 
Liégeois, J.P., Claessens, W., Camara, D., and Klerkx, J., 1991, Short-lived Eburnian orogeny 
in  southern  Mali.  Geology,  tectonics,  U-Pb  and  Rb-Sr  geochronology:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 50, p. 111-136. 
Longerich, H.P., Jackson, S.E., Günther, D., 1996, Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma 
mass  spectrometric  transient  signal  data  acquisition  and  analyte  concentration 
calculation: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, v.11, p. 899-904. 
McCuaig,  T.C.,  and  Kerrich,  R.,  1998,  P-T-t-deformation-fluid  characteristics  of  lode  gold 
deposits:  evidence  from  alteration  systematics:  Ore  Geology  Reviews,  v.  12,  p.  381-
453. 
McFarlane,  C.R.M.,  Mavrogenes,  J.,  Lentz,  D.,  King,  K.,  Allibone,  A.,  and  Holcombe,  R., 
2011, Geology and Intrusion-Related Affinity of the Morila Gold Mine, Southeast Mali: 
Economic Geology, v. 106, p. 727-750. 
Meinert,  L.  D.,  Dipple,  G.M.,  and  Nicolescu,  S.,  2005,  World  Skarn  Deposits:  Economic 
Geology, 100th Anniversary Volume, p. 299-336. 
67

--- Page 86 ---
Mikucki, E.J., and Ridley, J.R., 1993, The hydrothermal fluid of Archæan lode-gold deposits 
at  different  metamorphic  grades:  compositional  constraints  from  ore  and  wallrock 
alteration assemblages: Mineralium Deposita, v. 28, p. 469-481. 
Milési,  J.P.,  Ledru,  P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Dommanget,  A.,  and  Marcoux,  E.,  1992,  Early 
Proterozoic  ore  deposits  and  tectonics  of  the  Birimian  orogenic  belt,  West  Africa: 
Precambrian Research, v. 58, p. 305-344. 
Ndiaye, P.M., Dia, A., Vialette, Y., Diallo, D.P., Ngom, P.M., Sylla, M., Wade, S., and Dioh, 
E.,  1997,  Données  pétrographiques,  géochimiques  et  géochronologiques  nouvelles  sur 
les  granitoïdes  du  Paléoprotérozoïque  du  Supergroupe  de  Dialé-Daléma  (Senégal 
Oriental):  Implications  pétrogénétiques  et  géodynamiques:  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences, v. 25, p. 193-208. 
Nekrasov, I.Y., 1996, Geochemistry, Mineralogy and Genesis of Gold Deposits, CRC Press, 
A.A. Balkema Publishers, Brookfield, USA, p. 141-180. 
Oberthür,  T.,  Vetter,  U.,  Davis,  D.W.,  and  Amanor,  J.A.,  1998,  Age  constraints  on  gold 
mineralization  and  Paleoproterozoic  crustal  evolution  in  the  Ashanti  belt  of  southern 
Ghana: Precambrian Research, v. 89, p. 129-143. 
Obolensky, A.A., Gushchina, L. V., Borisenko, A. S., Borovikov, A.A., and  Nevol’ko, P.A., 
2009, Computer thermodynamic modeling of the transport and deposition of Sb and Au 
during  the  formation  of  Au-Sb  deposits:  Russian  Geology  and  Geophysics,  v.  50,  p. 
950-965. 
Olson, S.F., Diakité, K., Ott, L., Guindo, A., Ford, C.R.B., Winer, N., Hanssen, E., Lay, N., 
Bradley, R., and  Pohl, D., 1992, Regional Setting, Structure, and Descriptive Geology 
of the Middle Proterozoic Syama Gold Deposit, Mali, West Africa: Economic Geology, 
v. 87, p. 310-331. 
Pawlig, S., Gueye, M., Klischies, R., Schwarz, S., Wemmer, K., and Siegesmund, S., 2006, 
Geochemical and Sr-Nd isotopic data on the Birimian of the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier 
(Eastern Senegal): Implications on the Palaeoproterozoic evolution of the West African 
Craton: South African Journal of Geology, v. 109, p. 411-427. 
Pons,  J.,  Oudin,  C.,  and  Valero,  J.,  1992,  Kinematics  of  large  syn-orogenic  intrusions: 
example  of  the  Lower  Proterozoic  Saraya  batholith  (Eastern  Senegal):  Geologische 
Rundschau, v. 81, p. 473-486. 
Pouclet,  A.,  Doumbia,  S.,  and  Vidal,  M.,  2006,  Geodynamic  setting  of  the  Birimian 
volcanism in central Ivory Coast (western Africa) and its place in the Palaeoproterozoic 
68

--- Page 87 ---
evolution  of  the  Man  Shield:  Bulletin  de  la  Société  Géologique  de  France,  v.  177,  p. 
105-121. 
Ridley, J.R., and Diamond, L.W., 2000, Fluid Chemistry of Orogenic Lode Gold Deposits and 
Implications for Genetic Models: SEG Reviews, v. 2000, p. 141-162. 
Schwartz,  M.  O.,  and  Melcher,  F.,  2004,  The  Falémé  Iron  District,  Senegal:  Economic 
Geology, v. 99, p. 917-939. 
Sharp,  Z.D.,  Essene,  E.J.,  and  Kelly,  W.C.,  1985,  A  re-examination  of  the  arsenopyrite 
geothermometer:  pressure  considerations  and  applications  to  natural  assemblages: 
Canadian Mineralogist, v. 23, p. 517-534. 
Shenberger,  D.M.,  and  Barnes,  H.L.,  1989,  Solubility of  gold in  aqueous sulphide solutions 
from 150° to 350°C: Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, v. 53, p. 269–278. 
Sylvester,  P.J.,  Cabri,  L.J.,  Tubrett,  M.N.,  McMahon,  G.,  Laflamme,  J.H.G.,  and 
Peregoedova,  A.,  2005,  Synthesis  and  evaluation  of  a  fused  pyrrhotite  standard 
reference  material  for  platinum  group  elements  and  gold  analysis  by  laser  ablation 
ICPMS,  in	 Törmänen,  T.O.,  and  Alapieti,  T.T.,  eds.,  10th  International  Platinum 
Symposium: Oulu, Geological Survey of Finland, Extended Abstracts, p. 16-20.  
Thorne,  K.G.,  Lentz,  D.R.,  Hoy,  D.,  Fyffe,  L.R.,  and    Cabri,  L.J.,  2008,  Characteristics  of 
Mineralization  at  the  Main  Zone  of  the  Clarence  Stream  Gold  Deposit,  Southwestern 
New  Brunswick,  Canada:  Evidence  for  an  Intrusion-Related  Gold  System  in  the 
Northern Appalachian Orogen: Exploration and Mining Geology, v. 17, p. 13-49. 
Treloar, P.J., Lawrence, D.M., Senghor, D., Boyce, A., and Harbidge, P., 2014, The Massawa 
gold  deposit,  Eastern  Senegal,  West  Africa:  an  orogenic  gold  deposit  sourced  from 
magmatically derived fluids?: Geological Society, London, Special Publications, v. 393, 
p. 135-160. 
Ulrich, S., Konopásek, J., Jeřábek, P., and Tajčmanová, L., 2011, Transposition of structures 
in  the  Neoproterozoic  Kaoko  Belt  (NW  Namibia)  and  their  absolute  timing: 
International Journal of Earth Sciences, v. 100, p. 415–429. 
Vassallo, J.J., Wilson, C.J.L., 2002, Paleoproterozoic regional-scale non-coaxial deformation: 
an  example  from  eastern  Eyre  Peninsula,  South  Australia:  Journal  of  Structural 
Geology, v. 24, p. 1-24. 
Velásquez, G., Béziat, D., Salvi, S., Siebenaller, L., Borisova, A.Y., Pokrovski, G.S., and De 
Parseval,  P.,  2014,  Formation  and  deofrmation  of  pyrite  and  implications  for  gold 
69

--- Page 88 ---
mineralization in the El Callao district, Venezuela: Economic Geology, v. 109, p. 457-
486.  
Vidal,  M.,  Gumiaux,  C.,  Cagnard,  F.,  Pouclet,  A.,  Ouattara,  G.,  and  Pichon,  M.,  2009, 
Evolution of a Paleoproterozoic “weak type” orogeny in the West African Craton (Ivory 
Coast): Tectonophysics, v. 477, p. 145-159. 
Villeneuve, M., 2008, Review of the orogenic belts on the western side of the West African 
Craton:  the  Bassarides,  Rokelides  and  Mauritanides,  in  Ennih,  N.,  and  Liégeois,  J.P., 
eds., The boundaries of the West African Craton: Geological Society of London Special 
Publication 297, p. 169-201. 
Villeneuve, M., and Cornée, J.J., 1994, Structure, evolution and palaeogeography of the West 
African craton and bordering belts during the Neoproterozoic: Precambrian Research, v. 
69, p. 307-326. 
Williams-Jones, A.E., Bowell, R.J., and Migdisov, A.A., 2009, Gold in Solution: Elements, v. 
5, p. 281-287. 
Williams-Jones, A.E., and Normand, C., 1997, Controls of Mineral Parageneses in the System 
Fe-Sb-S-O: Economic Geology, v. 92, p. 308-324. 
Wilson,  S.A.,  Ridley,  W.I.,  and  Koenig,  A.E.,  2002,  Development  of  sulfide  calibration 
standards  for  the  laser  ablation  inductively-coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry 
technique: Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, v. 16, p. 406-409.  
Yavuz,  F.,  Yavuz,  V.,  and  Sasmaz,  A.,  2006,  WinClastour  -  a  visual  basic  program  for 
tourmaline formula calculation and classification: Computers & Geosciences, v. 32, p. 
1156-1168.  
70

--- Page 89 ---
11. 
Supplementary material 
11.1.  Representative  chemical  composition  of  syn-mineralization 
stage hydrothermal tourmalines at Sadiola Hill. 
11.2.  Representative analyses of ore minerals. 
11.3.  Representative analyses of gold phases. 
11.4.  Representative  EPMA  analyses  of  Stage  I  arsenopyrite 
crystals. 
11.5.  Representative  LA-ICPMS  analyses  of  Stage  I  arsenopyrites 
and pyrites. 
11.6.  Representative  EPMA  analyses  of  buffered  arsenopyrite 
crystals used for geothermometry.  
71

--- Page 90 ---
72

--- Page 91 ---
73

--- Page 92 ---
74

--- Page 93 ---
75

--- Page 94 ---
76

--- Page 95 ---
77

--- Page 96 ---
78

--- Page 97 ---
79

--- Page 98 ---
80

--- Page 99 ---
81

--- Page 100 ---
82

--- Page 101 ---
Chapter  III.  The  Alamoutala  carbonate-hosted  gold 
deposit, Kédougou-Kénieba inlier, West Africa. 
Quentin  Masurel1*,  Nicolas  Thébaud1,  John  Miller1,  Stanislav  Ulrich2,  Malcolm  Peter  Roberts3, 
Didier Béziat4 
1Centre for Exploration Targeting, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, 
WA, Australia. 
2AngloGold Ashanti Australia Limited, Asset Development - Brownfields, 44 St. Georges Terrace, Perth, 
WA, Australia. 
3Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation & Analysis, The University of Western Australia. 
4Laboratoire Géosciences Environment Toulouse, UMR-CNRS 5563, Université Paul Sabatier, France. 
*Corresponding author: qmasurel@hotmail.com 
Keywords:  Yatela,  carbonate-hosted  gold,  Eburnean  orogeny,  Kédougou-Kénieba 
inlier, West Africa. 
1. Abstract 
The  Alamoutala  gold  deposit  is  located  in  the  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  a 
window  of  Paleoproterozoic  rocks  that  outcrop  in  eastern  Senegal  and  western  Mali. 
The  deposit  is  part  of  the  ~3  Moz  Au  Yatela  district  and  produced  308,400  oz  Au 
between  2002  and  2012.  Country  rocks  in  the  Alamoutala  open  pit  consist  of 
limestones, arenites, wackes, and siltstones. The sedimentary rocks have been subjected 
to  polycyclic  deformation  and  regional  greenschist-facies  metamorphism.  Syn-
kinematic,  calc-alkaline,  intermediate  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  stocks  intruded  the 
metasedimentary rock sequences at 2083 ± 7 Ma (U-Pb on zircon). Amphibolite-facies 
contact metamorphism of carbonate rocks resulted in the formation of a high T-low P 
magnetite-bearing skarn. Field relationships and micro-textural data, however, indicate 
that  economic  gold  mineralization  is  shear-hosted  and  occurred  during  retrograde 
contact metamorphism. Geometric and kinematic analyses indicate that the ore-hosting 
structures were undergoing sinistral-reverse displacement at the time of mineralization. 
Ore  minerals  are  synchronous  with  a  potassic  hydrothermal  alteration  assemblage 
83

--- Page 102 ---
defined as biotite + calcite + pyrite ± K-feldspar, actinolite-tremolite, quartz, muscovite, 
and  tourmaline.  Petrographic  studies  reveal  that  ore-related  sulfides  largely  consist  of 
pyrite with  lesser  pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite. The ore also contains accessory  Ag-Sb-
As-Hg-Bi-Te-Mo-W-Zn-Pb-Ni-Co-U-bearing mineral  species. The  Alamoutala deposit 
represents  two  distinct  hydrothermal  systems  in  which  a  locally-developed  magnetite-
bearing skarn was overprinted by a regional orogenic gold event in the late Eburnean. 
2. Introduction 
The Alamoutala deposit is situated within the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier (KKI), 
which  represents  the  westernmost  exposure  (approx.  22000  km2)  of  Paleoproterozoic 
crust in the West African Craton (inset, Fig. 1).  The KKI hosts  numerous world-class 
gold  districts,  such  as  Loulo-Gounkoto  (~14  Moz),  Sadiola  (~10  Moz),  Yatela  (~3 
Moz), and Sabodala-Massawa (~8 Moz) (Fig. 1). Gold deposits in the inlier are hosted 
by  a  wide  range  of  host  rocks  including  mafic  volcanic  rocks,  detrital  sedimentary 
rocks, and carbonates. The relative timing and structural setting of gold deposits in the 
KKI  indicate  that  the  mineralizing  episode  occurred  during  a  period  of  transcurrent 
deformation coeval with calc-alkaline magmatism between ca. 2090 and 2070 Ma, after 
the cessation of regional compressional deformation (Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar et 
al., 2014; Masurel et al., in press). The KKI also hosts iron skarn deposits of the Falémé 
district, which collectively represent the largest Birimian iron resource of West Africa 
(750  Mt  ore  reserves,  ArcellorMittal  2007,  press  release)  (Fig.  1).  The  iron  skarns 
formed  post-peak  metamorphism  at  ca.  2080  Ma  and  are  spatially  and  genetically 
associated  with  syn-kinematic  plutons,  such  as  the  Balangouma  monzodiorite  and  the 
Boboti  clinopyroxene-hornblende-bearing  granodiorite  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002; 
Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004;  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a;  Lambert-Smith,  2014).  Recent 
research in the eastern part of the KKI has highlighted the spatial association between 
calc-alkaline Eburnean plutons, gold mineralization, and local iron skarn mineralization, 
suggesting  the  potential  role  of  a  complex  fluid  history  in  the  development  of  major 
gold deposits (e.g., Loulo, Lawrence et al., 2013a,b). The Alamoutala carbonate-hosted 
gold deposit occurs within a magnetite-bearing contact-metamorphic aureole associated 
with syn-kinematic, calc-alkaline, intermediate quartz-feldspar-porphyry stocks (Fig. 1). 
84

--- Page 103 ---
The deposit therefore provides an ideal setting to investigate field relationships between 
magnetite  skarn  formation  and  gold  mineralization  in  the  region.  Although  initial 
attempts  to  date  the  gold  mineralization  in-situ  have  failed,  this  study  outlines  the 
geology,  tectonic  setting,  contact  metamorphism,  absolute  timing,  and  whole  rock 
geochemistry of the local intrusive stocks, hydrothermal alteration, and ore mineralogy 
in  the  area  of  the  Alamoutala  gold  deposit.  The  primary  conclusion  is  that  the 
Alamoutala  deposit  represents  a  locally-developed  magnetite-bearing  skarn  in  the 
aureole  to  the  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  stocks  that  was  overprinted  by  a  regional 
orogenic gold event in the late Eburnean. 
3. Geological setting 
3.1.  Regional geology  
The geology of the KKI consists of two volcanic rock belts (Mako and Falémé) 
separated  by  wider  sedimentary  basins  (Dialé-Daléma  and  Kofi)  (Fig.  1).  The  crustal 
blocks  are  separated  by  two  regional-scale  lineaments,  respectively  the  Main 
Transcurrent  Zone  (Ledru  et  al.,  1991)  and  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  (Bassot  and 
Dommanget,  1986)  (Fig.  1).  The  Mako  volcanic  belt  (Fig.  1)  consists  of  tholeiitic 
basalts and calc-alkaline andesitic lavas intercalated with minor immature sedimentary 
and  volcaniclastic  rocks  (Bassot,  1987;  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Dioh  et  al.,  2006; 
Gueye  et  al.,  2008).  The  volcanic  assemblage  has  been  dated  between  2197  ±  13  Ma 
(Dia,  1988)  and  2160  ±  16  Ma  (Boher  et  al.,  1992).  Gneisses  of  the  Kakadian-Badon 
basement have been dated between 2194 ± 4 and 2202 ± 6 Ma, and are interpreted to 
represent  the  deeper  root  of  the  Mako  volcanic  rocks  (Dia  et  al.,  1997,  Pawlig  et  al, 
2006;  Gueye  et  al.,  2007).  The  Mako  bimodal  volcanic  rocks  were  intruded  by  the 
Sandikounda  layered  plutonic  complex  at  2158  ±  8  Ma  (Dia  et  al.,  1997).  The  latter 
complex largely consists of gabbro and hornblende-biotite-tonalite (Dioh et al., 2006). 
The Falémé volcano-sedimentary belt (Fig. 1) has only been recently recognized during 
exploration  activities  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Lawrence,  2010).  It  consists  of  calc-
alkaline  volcaniclastic  rocks,  chert,  manganiferous  shale,  wackes,  minor  calc-alkaline 
andesitic lavas, and subordinate felsic flows (Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Dioh et al., 2006; 
85

--- Page 104 ---
Gueye et al., 2008; Lawrence, 2010). Available geochronological data are limited to a 
rhyolite  flow  dated  at  2099 ± 4 Ma  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002),  but  indicate  a  late 
Birimian formation in relation to the Mako volcanic belt. Geochemical studies carried 
out  on  both  the  Mako  and  Falémé  volcanic  rocks  are  consistent  with  a  volcanic  arc 
setting (Dia et al., 1997; Schwartz and Melcher, 2004; Dioh et al., 2006; Pawlig et al., 
2006). The Dialé-Daléma and Kofi sedimentary basins (Fig. 1) are composed of thick 
sequences of volcaniclastic rocks, arenites, wackes, siltstones, argillites, and carbonates, 
with subordinate andesitic lavas, rhyolite flows, and pyroclastites (Bassot, 1987; Hirdes 
and Davis, 2002). Available detrital  zircon data from the  region (Fig. 1) indicate ages 
from 2165 ± 1 Ma (Hirdes and Davis, 2002) down to 2093 ± 7 Ma (Boher et al., 1992), 
which suggests that the Dialé-Daléma and Kofi sequences represent rocks deposited in 
syn-deformational foreland basins. Rocks of the sedimentary basins and volcanic belts 
were intruded by different generations of syn-tectonic, calc-alkaline plutons during the 
Eburnean  orogeny  between  ca.  2115  and  2070  Ma.  These  granitoids  include 
metaluminous hornblende-biotite-bearing diorite to granodiorite (e.g., Mamakono, 2076 
± 3 Ma, Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Tinkoto, 2074 ± 5 Ma, Gueye et al., 2007), pyroxene-
bearing granodiorite-tonalite (e.g., Boboti, 2080 ± 1 Ma, Hirdes and Davis, 2002), and 
peraluminous monzogranites (e.g., Saraya, 2079 ± 2 Ma, Hirdes and Davis, 2002) (Fig. 
1).  Available  geochronological  data  suggest  that  the  emplacement  of  most  Eburnean 
granitoids took place within a short time span between ca. 2090 and 2070 Ma (Bassot 
and  Caen-Vachette,  1984;  Ndiaye  et  al.,  1997;  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Gueye  et  al., 
2007).  
Country rocks in the KKI have undergone polycyclic deformation, which included early 
thrusting  events  responsible  for  crustal  thickening  (D1-D2),  followed  by  a  period  of 
transcurrent tectonics accommodating oblique convergence (D3-D4) (Ledru et al., 1991; 
Milési et al., 1992; Gueye et al., 2008; Dabo and Aïfa, 2010, 2011; Diene et al., 2012; 
Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a;  Treloar  et  al.,  2014;  Masurel  et  al.,  in  press).  Little  is  known 
about the kinematics of the D1 event due to penetrative reworking of the early fabric by 
later deformation. The D2 and D3 events correlate with the Eburnean orogeny and were 
undoubtedly  responsible  for  the  formation  of  map  scale  structures.  The  regional-scale 
shear zones are interpreted to have formed as sinistral transpressional faults during D2 
NW-SE shortening (Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar et al., 2014). The D3 event marks a 
switch from a  dominantly  coaxial system to non-coaxial deformation. The bulk  of  the 
86

--- Page 105 ---
gold  deposit  formation  in  the  KKI  occured  during  D3  NNW-SSE  shortening,  with 
hydrothermal  fluid  circulation  along  the  sinistral  regional-scale  shear  zones  and  steep 
NNE-trending  shears  connected  to  structural  traps  in  the  Kofi  basin  (Lawrence  et  al., 
2013a; Treloar et al., 2014; Masurel et al., in press). The last deformation event, D4, has 
been locally reported on the Senegalese side of the Falémé River and is correlated with 
the  late  dextral  reactivation  of  the  N-S-oriented  to  NNE-trending  structural  corridors 
during NE-SW-directed shortening (Dabo and Aïfa, 2011). Available metamorphic data 
for  the  KKI  point  to  peak  regional  metamorphism  under  greenschist-facies  conditions 
(Dia et al., 1997; Debat et al., 2003). Amphibolite-facies contact-metamorphic aureoles 
have  locally  been  observed  surrounding  late-Eburnean  granitoids  (Debat  et  al.,  1984; 
Pawlig et al., 2006). Mineral assemblages developed during regional metamorphism are 
overprinted  by  contact-metamorphic  mineral  assemblages  (Schwartz  and  Melcher, 
2004).  Gold  deposits  in  the  region  are  unmetamorphosed  (Lawrence  et  al,  2013a; 
Masurel et al., in press).  
87

--- Page 106 ---
88

--- Page 107 ---
Figure 1.  Geologic  map  of the  Birimian Kédougou-Kéniéba  inlier (1:250,000  scale,  modified  after 
Gueye et al., 2007; Lawrence et al., 2013a). Inset map shows the geologic setting of the West African 
craton (modified  after  Boher  et al., 1992).  The  Falémé  River forms the  international  border  with 
Senegal to the west and Mali to the east and north. Abbreviations refer to plutons mentioned in the 
text:  (Mako  belt)  Ma  =  Mamakono  granodiorite,  Ti  =  Tinkoto  granodiorite,  (Falémé  belt)  Bal  = 
Balangouma tonalite, Bo = Boboti granodiorite, SF = South Falémé granodiorite, DS = Dar Salam 
granodiorite, Msl = Moussala granodiorite, Bbj = Bambadji granodiorite, Bt = Boto tonalite; (Kofi 
basin) Ga = Gamaye monzogranite. Geochronological data from Bassot and Caen-Vachette, 1984; 
Dia, 1988; Calvez et al., 1990; Boher et al., 1992; Dia et al., 1997; Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Gueye et 
al., 2007. 
3.2.  Local geology  
The  geology  of  the  Kofi  basin  in  the  Yatela  region  consists  of  feldspathic  wackes, 
arkosic  arenites,  and  carbonates,  with  subordinate  rhyolite  flows,  and  pyroclastites  to 
the  west  progressing  to  siltstones  and  argillites  further  east  (Fig.  2).  Thick  sequences 
(>250 m) of carbonate rocks are exposed and consist of limestones locally interlayered 
with dolomitic horizons. The original lithostratigraphy consisted of carbonates overlain 
by younger sequences of detrital sedimentary rocks based on way-up indicators, such as 
fining-upwards  sequences,  scour-and-fill  structures,  and  rare  cross-bedding 
in 
sandstone. Chemical and detrital sedimentary rocks of the Kofi basin transition towards 
the  west  into  a  linear  volcano-sedimentary  belt  that  consists  of  calc-alkaline 
volcaniclastic  rocks  and  porphyritic  andesite  flows.  Sedimentary  and  volcanic  rocks 
were  intruded  by  different  generations  of  syn-tectonic,  calc-alkaline  plutons  forming 
circular to elliptical bodies of various sizes (Fig. 2). A large plutonic complex has been 
mapped  in  the  field  2  km  west  of  the  Alamoutala  deposit.  The  plutons  range  in 
composition from diorite and hornblende-biotite-granodiorite to K-rich biotite-granites. 
The  Alamoutala  deposit  is  located  within  the  Kofi  basin  and  occurs  in  the  contact-
metamorphic aureole to isolated intermediate quartz-feldspar-porphyry stocks. Country 
rocks  in  the  Alamoutala  deposit  area  have  undergone  regional  greenschist-facies 
metamorphism.  For  the  purpose  of  clarity,  the  prefix  “meta”  will  be  omitted  in  the 
following sections.  
89

--- Page 108 ---
Figure 2. Geology of the Sadiola-Yatela district based on AngloGold Ashanti regional map (2014) 
and field investigation by the authors (scale 1:75,000).  
90

--- Page 109 ---
4. Alamoutala exploration and mining history 
The Alamoutala gold deposit is located in the Yatela mining district. The district 
displays  widespread  evidence  of  ancient  and  recent  artisanal  mining,  with  written 
records  of  mining  dating  back  more  than  250  years  (public  data  from  IAMGold 
website). A geochemical survey was conducted in 1994 over the Alamoutala and Yatela 
prospects, followed by trench sampling in 1996. Drill testing resulted in the discovery 
of  a  significant  gold  resource  at  Yatela  and  a  minor  one  at  Alamoutala.  Disseminated 
magnetite  is  abundant  in  host  rocks  at  Alamoutala  but  has  never  been  of  economic 
interest  in  contrast  to  the  magnetite  skarns  of  the  Falémé  district  (see  Fig.  1).  In  late 
1997, IAMGOLD and Anglo American Corporation (now AngloGold  Ashanti) signed 
an agreement to purchase the Yatela concession located 25 km north of the Sadiola Hill 
gold  deposit.  The  Government  of  Mali  issued  an  exploitation  permit  for  the  Yatela 
project in February 2000. The Alamoutala gold deposit has been operated by the Société 
des  Mines  d’Or  du  Mali  (SEMOS),  a  joint  venture  between  AngloGold  Ashanti 
Limited,  IAMGold  Corporation  and  the  government  of  Mali,  until  the  mine  was 
decommissioned in 2012. The total production of the Alamoutala gold deposit over its 
mine life was 308,400 oz Au at an average grade of 1.70 g/t (AngloGold Ashanti 2011 
mineral resource and ore reserve report).  
5. Materials and methods 
5.1.  Pit mapping, logging, sampling and 3D modeling  
Systematic  face  mapping  was  done  on  all  accessible  ramps  of  the  abandoned 
open  –pit  mine  at  the  Alamoutala  deposit.  Detailed  logging  was  undertaken  and 
included four diamond drill holes chosen to include the main structural, lithological, and 
mineralogical  variations  observed  in  the  deposit.  A  number  of  outcrops  were  also 
investigated  surrounding  the  deposit  to  integrate  pit  observations  into  a  regional 
framework.  Petrographic  data  reported  in  this  paper  largely  come  from  drill  core 
samples and, to a lesser extent, from oriented blocks sampled directly in the field. All 
structural  readings  are  given  in  true  north  coordinates.  Planar  features  are  given  in 
91

--- Page 110 ---
strike/dip/quadrant  and  linear data  are  given  as  plunge  and azimuth.  In  this  paper,  the 
“y” subscript indicates that the considered structural event is only valid for the Yatela 
district,  which  may  differ  from  regional  structural  compilations  reported  for  the  West 
African  Craton.  The  trends  of  ore  shoots  in  and  surrounding  the  main  orebody  of  the 
Alamoutala deposit were evaluated using Leapfrog® three-dimensional rendering of the 
assay data, which combined grade control and exploration. 
5.2.  Petrography and mineral chemistry 
Approximately  50  polished  thin  sections  were  prepared  at  the  University  of 
Western  Australia  (UWA)  and  at  Vancouver  Petrographics  Ltd.  The  selected  suite  of 
samples included country rocks with various alteration types and intensities, and all ore 
types.  These  were  studied  using  optical  microscopy  at  the  Centre  for  Exploration 
Targeting  (UWA),  scanning  electron  microscopy  and  electron  probe  microanalysis  at 
the  Centre  for  Microscopy,  Characterisation  and  Analysis  (CMCA)  at  UWA. 
Backscattered  electron  (BSE)  imaging  and  mineral  chemical  analyses  were  performed 
using a Tescan Vega3 XM (SEM) equipped with an Oxford instrument X-ACT energy 
dispersive  detector  and  a  JEOL  JXA-8530F  Hyperprobe  fitted  with  5  wavelength-
dispersive spectrometers. Quantitative microanalyses were performed using proprietary 
standards. The analytical software used to collect semi-quantitative micro-analyses was 
the  Oxford  Instruments®  INCA  analytical  suite  on  the  Tescan  Vega  3.  Operating 
parameters  for  the  SEM-EDS  include  an  accelerating  voltage  of  20  kV,  a  working 
distance  of  15  mm,  a  beam  current  of  1.5  nA  and  a  detector  process  time  of  4  s. 
Operating  conditions  for  the  wavelength-dispersive  (WD)  spectrometer  were  an 
accelerating voltage of 15 kV, a beam current of 20 nA and a counting time of 20 s on 
peak  for  silicates.  Mean  atomic  number  background  and  ZAF  corrections  were  used 
throughout. The algorithm utilized was that of Armstrong (1988). The multi-elemental 
X-ray  mapping  of  silicates  was  carried  out  by  WD  spectrometry  using  the  same 
operating conditions for probe calibration detailed above in addition to a 80 nA beam 
current,  20 ms  per  pixel dwell  time, and 2  x 2 m  pixel dimension. Mineral mapping 
results were processed off-line with the CalcImage® software. 
92

--- Page 111 ---
5.3.  Whole-rock geochemical analyses 
Least-altered  rock  samples  of  the  Alamoutala  intermediate  quartz-feldspar-
porphyry stocks were obtained from wall rocks in the open pit and diamond drill core 
for  geochemical  characterization  and  comparison  with  those  of  the  Falémé  plutons. 
Approximately 1 kg of fresh, homogeneous rock was collected per sample. Rust stains 
were  cleaned  with  abrasives  and  weathered  surfaces  were  removed  prior  to  crushing. 
Rock chips were pulverized using low chrome-steel vessels. Rock powders were mixed 
with  lithium  metaborate/tetraborate  and  prepared  as  fusion  for  lithogeochemisty 
package  LITH/205X  analysis  at  Intertek  Genalysis  Laboratories  in  Perth.  Major 
elements  were  measured  by  X-ray  fluorescence  spectrometry  (XRF).  The  rare  earth 
elements  (REE),  high  field  strength  elements  (HFSE),  and  other  trace  elements  (e.g., 
Ba, Cr, Cs, Ga, Rb, Sc, Sn, Sr, U, V, W) were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma 
mass  spectrometry  (ICP-MS)  and  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission 
spectrometry  (ICP-OES).  Other  metals  were  analyzed  by  the  same  techniques  but 
prepared  with  multi-acid  digestions,  including  hydrofluoric,  nitric,  perchloric,  and 
hydrochloric acids in teflon tubes. Gold content was measured by fire-assay followed by 
ICP-MS.  The  Geological  Survey  of  Western  Australia  Bunbury  basalt  and  Kerba 
granite standards were analyzed during each session to monitor accuracy and instrument 
stability. The accuracy of the data was typically better than 3% for the major elements 
and  trace  elements  were  within  10%  of  reference  values.  Detail  detection  limits 
achieved for each analysis are provided in the supplementary material.  
5.4.  Geochronology  
Intermediate  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  stocks  that  outcrop  on  walls  of  the 
Alamoutala  open  pit  have  been  dated  in  order  to  compare  the  timing  of  magma 
emplacement and formation of the magnetite-bearing skarn aureole with those events in 
the Falémé iron district. Approximately 5 kg of rock was collected from outcrop for U-
Pb geochronology. After cleaning and removal of weathered surfaces, the rock sample 
was  processed  at  Geotrack  Pty.  Ltd.  in  Australia.  The  sample  was  crushed  using  a 
mechanical jaw crusher, and powdered using a ring mill. Heavy minerals were separated 
93

--- Page 112 ---
using standard heavy liquids and magnetic procedures. Target zircons were handpicked 
from zircon concentrates and fractions for each sample and mounted in 25 mm epoxy-
resin  discs  with  chips  of  U/Pb  zircon  standard  BR266  (559  Ma,  903  ppm  U;  Stern, 
2001) and OGC1 (3465 Ma; Stern et al., 2009), and silicate glass NBS610 at the Minsep 
Laboratories  in  Denmark  in  Western  Australia.  Cathodoluminescence  (CL)  and 
backscattered  electron  (BSE)  imaging  on  gold-coated  mounts  were  performed  using  a 
Tescan  Vega-3  scanned  electron  microscope  at  the  CMCA  of  the  UWA.  The  U–Pb 
analyses were performed using the sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP 
II) at the John de Laeter Centre of Excellence for Mass Spectrometry, Curtin University 
(Western  Australia)  using  standard  operating procedures  similar  to  those  described  by 
Compston et al. (1984) and Wingate and Kirkland (2013). Operating parameters include 
a  10  keV  primary  O2-  beam  focussed  to  a  ~20  µm  diameter  spot,  a  net  primary  ion 
current between 1.6 and 3.0 nA, and a secondary ion analyzer set to a mass of ≥ 5000. 
Six  data  collection  cycles  (scans)  were  performed  per  analysis,  and  count  times  (per 
scan) were 10 s for the 204Pb, 206Pb, and 208Pb mass peaks and background, and 30 s for 
the 207Pb mass peak. Analyses of unknowns were referenced to multiple analyses of the 
BR266  /  M257  primary  standard  for  U/Pb  calibration.  Calibration  and  reproducibility 
uncertainties  are  included  in  the  errors  of  238U/206Pb  ratios  and  age  data  listed  in  the 
supplementary material. Data reduction was carried out using the software SQUID v2.5 
and  ISOPLOT  v3.0  (MS  Excel  add-ins  by  Ludwig,  2003,  2009).  Corrections  for 
common  Pb  were  based  on  measured  204Pb,  assuming  an  average  crustal  composition 
appropriate  to  the  age  of  the  mineral  (Stacey  and  Kramers,  1975).  Analytical  cut-offs 
were used in order to minimize the risk of including zircons with potentially disturbed 
U-Pb systematics during data interpretation. The U-Pb ages were only calculated from 
concordant  to  near-concordant  grains  (discordance  between  -3%  and  +10%).  In 
addition, analyses that comprised more than 1% of non-radiogenic 206Pb and yielded U 
concentrations  greater  than  1000  ppm  were  rejected.  All  age  estimates  are  reported 
below  with  95  %  confidence  and  include  propagated  uncertainties  in  the  standard 
calibrations. Raw data are listed in the supplementary material.  
94

--- Page 113 ---
6. Deposit geology 
6.1.  Sedimentary rocks and intrusions 
Country  rocks  in  the  Alamoutala  open  pit  consist  of  folded  sequences  of 
carbonates and detrital sedimentary rocks (Fig. 3). Limestones interlayered with minor 
dolomitic horizons outcrop on the eastern walls and are partially exposed on the western 
walls  of  the  pit.  The  dominant  carbonate  facies  is  pure,  although  it  is  locally  well-
bedded  and  characterized  by  abundant  thin  (0.2  –  2  cm)  argillaceous-silty  interbeds. 
Clastic rock sequences are exposed on the western pit walls and consist of alternating 
sequences  of  quartz-feldspar  to  feldspathic  wacke,  moderately  sorted  arkosic  arenite, 
and siltstone. Well-preserved way-up indicators, such as fining-upwards sequences and 
rare cross bedding in sandstone, indicate upright beds with a younging direction to the 
west. The main contact between the distinct rock types is faulted and is defined as the 
Alamoutala Fracture Zone.  
The  sedimentary  rocks  exposed  in  the  Alamoutala  open  pit  were  intruded  by 
three generations of intrusions that include intermediate quartz-feldspar-porphyry stocks 
and two distinct sets of mafic dikes (Fig. 3). Least-altered rock samples of the quartz-
feldspar-porphyry  stocks  collected  at  different  locations  in  the  open  pit  show  no 
significant mineralogical variations. The rocks are composed of up to 35% (modal vol.) 
phenocrysts (generally 1 mm up to 3 mm) set in a fine-grained (<0.1 mm) to very fine-
grained  (<0.05  mm)  quartzo-feldspathic  groundmass.  Quartz  phenocrysts  (up  to  10% 
modal  vol.)  are  sub-rounded  and  exhibit  rare  corrosion  gulf  textures.  Feldspar 
phenocrysts (up to 35% modal vol.) are euhedral prismatic and often exhibit oscillatory 
zoning.  Minor  magmatic  biotite  commonly  shows  sub-solidus  exsolution  of  rutile  and 
contains minute zircon inclusions with associated pleochroic haloes. Prismatic apatite is 
relatively  abundant.  Traces  amounts  of  igneous  magnetite  occur  disseminated  in  the 
groundmass.  Parts  of  the  epizonal  pluton  are  hydrothermally  altered  and  display 
evidence  of  sinistral-reverse  shearing.  A  second  generation  of  intrusion  cuts  both  the 
sedimentary rock sequences and the quartz-feldspar-porphyry stock in the northeastern 
part of the pit. It consists of a set of approximately 1-m-wide, NW-trending, sub-vertical 
mafic dikes (Fig. 3). The grain size and mineralogy of these mafic dikes are compatible 
95

--- Page 114 ---
with  that  of  diorite.  Although  their  absolute  age  of  emplacement  could  not  be 
determined  due  to  very  poor  zircon  yield,  the  dikes  are  hydrothermally  altered  and 
deformed by late shearing. The youngest generation of intrusive rocks consists of a set 
of  1.2-m-wide,  ENE-trending,  sub-vertical  mafic  dikes,  which  cuts  all  ore-hosting 
structures and is undeformed (Fig. 3).  
Figure 3. Geological map of the Alamoutala open pit and associated cross-section A-A’. Structural 
data  recorded  during  field  mapping  is  presented  as  equal  area  stereonets  using  the  lower 
hemisphere convention.  
96

--- Page 115 ---
97

--- Page 117 ---
Figure  4.  A-B)  Representative  micrographs  of  the  least-altered  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-
porphyry  in  plane  polarized  light  and  crossed  polars.  C)  Total  alkalis  vs.  SiO2  rock  classification 
diagram  from  Cox  et  al.  (1979).  D)  AFM  diagram  by  Irvine  and  Baragar  (1971).  Data  on  the 
Falémé  granitoids,  the  Saraya  monzogranite,  and  the  Gamaye  leucogranite  are  shown  for 
comparison  (analyses  included  from  Ndiaye  et  al.,  1997;  Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004).  E)  REE 
spider  plot  normalized  to  chondrite  values  from  Sun  and  McDonough  (1989).  F)  Spider  plot 
normalized to primitive mantle values from Sun and McDonough (1989). 
99

--- Page 118 ---
6.3.  Geochronology  
The  zircons  isolated  from  the  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  are  pale 
yellow to dark brown and black, generally between 40 x 100 µm and 150 x 350 µm, and 
euhedral  to  subhedral  prismatic.  The  vast  majority  of  the  grains  exhibit  strong 
oscillatory  zoning,  typical  of  igneous  zircons  (Fig.  5A).  Zircons  are  extensively 
fractured;  fluid  and  mineral  inclusions  are  common.  Eleven  analyses  of  the  standard 
BR266  and  four  analyses  of  OGC-1  were  performed.  One  analysis  of  the  BR266 
standard was discarded because the spot hit a dark grain with micro-cracks and yielded 
an inaccurate age of 579 Ma ± 2. Out of 10 primary standard analyses, the 1σ external 
spot  to  spot  uncertainty  was  0.74%  and  the  calibration  1σ  error  of  mean  was  0.31%. 
Thirty-seven analyses were obtained from 35 zircons. Out of these 37 analyses, 20 were 
rejected  on  the  basis  of  the  defined  cut-offs  in  order  to  keep  only  reliable  data.  Two 
additional  analyses  that  yielded  large  errors  on  the  207Pb/206Pb  age  due  to  poor 
instrument sensitivity were also rejected. Rejected analyses are presented with the raw 
data  and  on  the  Tera-Wasserburg  Concordia  plot  of  all  analyses  (Fig.  5B).  The  15 
reliable  analyses  define  a  multi-component  distribution  (n=2)  on  a  density  probability 
plot (Fig. 5C). These 15 analyses can be assigned into two groups on the basis of their 
207Pb/206Pb  ratios  (Fig.  5A-D).  The  four  analyses  assigned  to  Group  I  define  a  single 
population with a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2134 ± 12 Ma (MSWD = 0.46, 2σ 
error)  (Fig.  5D).  Eleven  analyses  assigned  to  Group  II  define  a  single  population  that 
yield a weighted mean date of 2083 ± 7 Ma (MSWD = 1.4, 2σ error) (Fig. 5D). Both 
ages  obtained  by the weighted average  method are within error of that obtained using 
Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Concordia plots. The weighted mean date indicated by Group II 
is  the  best  estimate  for  crystallization  age  of  the  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry 
i.e.  2083  ±  7  Ma.  The  older  date  indicated  by  Group  I  is  interpreted  to  represent  an 
inherited component of oscillatory zoned igneous zircons.  
100

--- Page 119 ---
Figure  5.  A)  CL  images  that  illustrate  zircon  morphology.  B)  Concordia  plot  (Tera-Wasserburg) 
showing all zircon analyses. See text for analysis rejection cut-offs. Inset provides a close-up view 
on near-concordant analyses. C) Probability density plot showing a mixed population component in 
the  near-concordant  zircon  analyses.  D)  Weighted  average  plot  of  all  near-concordant  analyses 
illustrating the two U-Pb age groups. 
6.4.  Contact metamorphism  
The  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  is  locally  bordered  by  contact 
metamorphic  zones 
in  country  rocks.  Amphibolite-facies  contact-metamorphic 
assemblages  overprint  regional  greenschist  facies  metamorphism  of  host  rocks  on  the 
basis  of  textural  relationships,  which  indicates  that  the  peak  of  the  regional 
metamorphism  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  KKI  occurred  prior  to  2083  ±  7  Ma.  Early 
recrystallization of limestone was followed by the development of both exoskarns and 
endoskarns,  which  resulted  in  the  destruction  of  all  primary  tectono-metamorphic 
texture  in  the  host  rocks  (Fig.  6A).  High  temperature-low  pressure  prograde  skarn 
assemblages are zoned and range from a proximal garnet-rich zone (0-5 m) (Fig. 6A-B) 
to an intermediate clinopyroxene-rich (5-10 m) (Fig. 6D), and distal actinolite/tremolite-
101

--- Page 120 ---
calcite-epidote-albite-rich  zones  further  away  from  the  intrusion  (10-50  m)  (Fig.  6E). 
Pockets of skarn-altered sedimentary rocks also occur locally throughout the opencast, 
suggesting  flushing  of  the  metasomatic  fluids,  and/or  a  complex  intrusive  stock 
geometry at depth. Reaction skarns formed after sandstone and siltstone consist of fine-
grained siliceous and calc-silicate-hornfels whereas those formed after silty limestones 
consist  of  calc-silicate  marble,  reflecting  a  dependence  on  protolith  composition. 
Exoskarns  locally  contain  disseminated  magnetite  (up  to  5%)  and  traces  to  minor 
amounts of pyrite (Fig. 6F-G).  
Figure  6.  Field  photographs  illustrating  contact  metamorphism  linked  to  emplacement  of  the 
Alamoutala quartz-feldspar-porphyry. A) Zoned skarn aureoles in marble. B) Megacrystic garnet 
in  calc-silicate  marble.  C)  Proximal  garnet-rich  exoskarn  (after  limestone).  Granular  garnets  are 
stretched along the planar fabric and partially retrogressed to a mixture of chlorite, hematite and 
calcite.  D)  Clinopyroxene-epidote-bearing  endoskarn.  E)  Pink  calcite  veins  associated  with  the 
porphyroblastic growth of actinolite in marble. Traces of pyrite and magnetite occur disseminated 
in  wall  rocks  of  such  veins.  F)  Tremolite-magnetite  skarn  lens  in  foliated  marble.  G)  Tremolite-
magnetite exoskarn in drill core.  
102

--- Page 121 ---
At  the  micro-scale,  garnets  may  exhibit  complex  oscillatory  zoning  reflecting 
the  propagation  of  reactive  fronts.  Despite  the  wide  range  of  internal  textures,  garnet 
composition  essentially  falls 
into 
the  andradite-grossular  series  (Fig.  7A-F). 
Representative  grains  indicate  essentially  And75Grs25  compositions,  although  internal 
growth  zones  can  reach  intermediate  And50Grs50  compositions.  The  composition  of 
clinopyroxene  in  endoskarn  varies  between  Hed48-55Di45-52Jo1  in  individual  grains  and 
between  different  grains  (Fig.  8A-B).  Retrogression  of  the  garnet-pyroxene  skarns 
occurs in the form of fine-grained granular epidote or as chlorite and calcite along grain 
boundaries,  cleavage  planes,  and  micro-fractures.  Retrograde  alteration  of  lower 
temperature  amphibole-rich  mineral  assemblages  is  minor  and  characterized  by 
clinozoisite, epidote, chlorite, calcite, and quartz.  
103

--- Page 122 ---
Figure 7. Electron probe end member garnet maps. Garnet composition at Alamoutala essentially 
falls  into  the  andradite-grossular  series.  Maps  A,  C,  and  E  show  the  %  in  andradite  in  selected 
garnets. In contrast, maps B, D, and F show the % in grossular. A-D) Oscillatory zoned garnet in 
exoskarn.  The  complex  zoning  reflects  evolution  of  the  fluid  during  progression  of  the  reaction 
front.  Potential  syn-growth  dissolution-reprecipitation  features  are  observed.  E-F)  Garnet  in 
endoskarn lacks complex zoning and typically is And90-100Grs0-10 in composition.  
104

--- Page 123 ---
Figure  8.  A)  Representative  chemical  composition  of  pyroxenes  analysed  by  electron  probe.  The 
stoichiometry was calculated using the WinPyrox software (Yavuz, 2013). MgCaSi2O6-FeCaSi2O6-
CaMnSi2O6  plot  (after  Meinert,  1992)  showing  the  compositional  ranges  of  clinopyroxene  in 
endoskarn at Alamoutala. Clinopyroxene is intermediate in composition and varies between Hed48-
55Di45-52Jo1  in  individual  grains  and  between  different  grains.  Data  for  the  Falémé  contact 
metasomatic magnetite skarns is presented for comparison. Shaded areas show the compositional 
ranges  of  clinopyroxene  in  the  Karakaene-Ndi  endoskarn  and  Goto  exoskarn  (modified  from 
Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004).  B)  Photo  micrograph  of  typical  clinopyroxene  in  endoskarn. 
Clinopyroxene  coexists  with  epidote,  the  latter  growing  over  magmatic  cores  of  allanite. 
Retrogression of the clinopyroxene is minor and marked by chlorite.  
6.5.  Structural setting and geometry 
 Ductile  deformation  (D1y  and  D2y):  The 
thermal  overprinting  during 
emplacement  of 
the  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  and  skarn  formation 
precludes accurate recording of any early structural component in the open pit. A steep 
planar  fabric  (S1)  now  sub-parallel  to  bedding  is  associated  with  stacking  of  the 
sedimentary  sequences  in  the  open  pit  and  surrounding  outcrops  (D1y).  The  quartz-
feldspar-porphyry stocks were emplaced post-D1y because they cut the S1 planar fabric.  
A  second  planar  fabric  (S2)  is  oblique  to  S1  and  is  associated  with  upright  to 
inclined disharmonic folds (F2). Fold axes plunge gently (10-30°) to the SSW and are 
associated  with  a  035°/55SE  axial-planar  cleavage  indicative  of  WNW  fold-vergence 
(D2y)  (Fig.  3,  9A).  The  S2  cleavage  is  refracted  along  the  margins  of  the  main 
porphyritic  granodiorite  stock.  Importantly,  garnet-pyroxene  skarn  assemblages  are 
affected  by  F2  folding  (Fig.  3,  9B).  Strong  evidence  for  ductile  deformation  is  also 
identified  at  the  micro-scale.  Under  the  microscope,  less-deformed  specimens  of  the 
105

--- Page 124 ---
porphyritic  granodiorite  exhibit  a  mortar  texture  in  which  quartz  and  feldspar 
porphyroclasts  are  surrounded  by  a  fine-grained  groundmass.  Strongly  deformed 
specimens display strained quartz porphyroclasts and feldspar phenocrysts that exhibit 
strain shadows.  Shear  sense indicators such as asymmetrical strain shadow, mica fish, 
and sigma-shaped porphyroclasts are compatible with reverse displacement along S2. 
Brittle deformation (D3y, D4y, D5y): A brittle overprint is recorded in outcrop and 
drill  core.  It  is  associated  with  sinistral  reactivation  of  the  Alamoutala  Fracture  Zone 
and NE-trending fault, as well as sinistral displacement along the S2 planar fabric and 
reactivated  bedding  planes  (D3y)  (Fig.  3,  9C).  The  Alamoutala  Fracture  Zone  strikes 
NNW to N-S and dips steeply to the west. The fault developed at the lithostratigraphic 
contact  in  the  south  part  of  the  pit  and  cuts  the  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  on  the 
northwestern  walls  of  the  pit.  The  fault  is  1-  to  7-m-wide  and  is  associated  with  a 
discrete pinch-and-swell geometry that extends both along strike and down dip. Biotite-
pyrite  slickenfibers  on  fault  walls  of  the  Alamoutala  Fracture  Zone  indicate  oblique 
displacement,  dominantly  sinistral  with  a  minor  component  of  reverse  displacement 
(Fig. 3, 9D). 
Following  D3s,  a  set  of  barren  quartz  veins  (<30-cm-wide)  preferentially 
developed  in  the  detrital  sedimentary  rocks  and  porphyritic  granodiorite  (D4y)  (Fig.  3, 
9E).  The  general  orientation  of  these  veins  is  215°/64°NW.  These  veins  trend  at  an 
angle  to  S2,  and  transect  F2  folds,  the  Alamoutala  Fracture  Zone  and  the  NE-trending 
shear zone.  
A  late  generation  of  E-  to  ENE-trending  sub-vertical  brittle  faults  crosscuts  all 
previously described structures and veins (D5y). These faults are 10-cm-to-1-m wide and 
contain fault gouge and clasts of host rocks (Fig. 3, 9F). Rare slickenfibers measured in 
the pit indicate dextral-(normal) displacement.  
106

--- Page 125 ---
Figure  9.  Alamoutala  structural  context  from  field  photographs.  A)  Disharmonic  F2  folds  in 
weathered  silty-marble.  Folding  is  highlighted  by  compositional  layering.  B)  Folded  calc-silicate 
marble which indicates F2 folding post-dates prograde skarn formation. C) NE-trending fault wall 
in  marble  displays  slickenfibers  that  indicate  oblique  sinistral-reverse  movement.  White  arrow 
indicates apparent movement of missing block. Slickenfibers consist in calcite together with traces 
rusty  pyrite.  D)  Fault  wall  on  the  Alamoutala  Shear  Zone  that  exhibit  a  sub-horizontal  gently 
south-plunging lineation marked by biotite-pyrite. E) Typical field example of the late quartz vein 
set oriented 215°/64°NW. F) Representative field photograph of a late brittle cross-fault.  
107

--- Page 126 ---
6.6.  Deposit-scale gold distribution  
A multidisciplinary approach combining pit mapping, niche sampling, diamond 
drill core logging, and modeling under Leapfrog® was used to identify the setting of the 
gold resource because the Alamoutala orebody has been mined out. The bulk of the ore 
is  hosted  by  the  Alamoutala  Fracture  Zone  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  by  the  steep  NE-
trending fault (Fig. 3, 10A-B). The Alamoutala Fracture Zone is discontinuous along its 
strike extensions. Gold mineralization is associated with sulfides aligned along the shear 
fabric in host rocks, and with disseminated sulfides in hydrothermal-tectonic breccias, 
which  together  define  about  85%  of  the  resource.  Gold-bearing  quartz  veins  are  not 
common in the deposit. Ore minerals are quite diverse, but their volumetric proportions 
are typically low in each rock type, ranging from approximately 0.5-3 % sulfides. The 
shear-hosted mineralization is commonly associated with gold grades ranging from 2-10 
g/t. Gold-related hydrothermal alteration mineral assemblages that occur in wall rocks 
to the Alamoutala Fracture Zone and NE-trending fault overprint contact-metamorphic 
mineral  assemblages  and  are  associated  with  solid-state  deformation  in  the  quartz-
feldspar-porphyry.  In  addition  to  the  shear-hosted  mineralization,  a  minor,  low-grade 
part of the gold mineralization (i.e. 1-2 g/t Au and less than 15% of the resource) locally 
presents  as  replacement-style  orebodies  correlated  with  pervasive  biotite-pyrite  lenses 
and  bedding-parallel  pyrite  seams  (Fig.  10C-D).  Such  ore  zones  have  been  observed 
along the intrusive contacts in low strain domains up to 15 m away from the Alamoutala 
Fracture  Zone  and  NE-trending  fault.  Although  textural  relationships  around  the 
intrusive  contact  reflect  a  complex  fluid  history,  these  relationships  indicate  that  the 
magnetite-bearing  skarn  aureole  formed  prior  to  these  replacement-style  orebodies. 
Also,  the  ore  mineralogy  within  the  shear  zones  is  equivalent  to  that  associated  with 
these  replacement-style  orebodies,  and  thus  the  latter  likely  formed  by  lateral 
hydrothermal fluid flow surrounding the auriferous shear zones.  
Leapfrog®  was  used  to  produce  a  three-dimensional  rendering  of  the  assay  data 
(combined  grade  control  and  exploration)  in order to better visualize and evaluate ore 
trends. Modeling indicates that gold mineralization was concentrated in low mean stress 
areas  surrounding  the  intrusive  stocks  and  in  damage  zones  surrounding  fault 
intersections (Fig. 11). Gold grades decrease with increasing distance from the quartz-
108

--- Page 127 ---
feldspar-porphyry  stocks.  The  bulk  of  the  ore  in  the  central  part  of  the  open  pit 
correlates with an approximately 35° south-dipping high grade ore shoot identified on a 
longitudinal section.  
Figure  10.  Representative  field  photographs  illustrating  controls  on  ore  location  and  ore  shoot 
geometry.  A)  Mineralized  shear  crosscutting  the  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  in  the 
northwestern end of the open pit. Benches are 5 m high. B) The Alamoutala Fracture Zone occupies 
the  lithostratigraphic  contact  between  detrital  metasedimentary  sequences  and  marbles  at  the 
southern end of the open pit. C-D) Replacement-style orebody. 
109

--- Page 128 ---
Figure 11. Leapfrog® scene that illustrates structural controls on ore shoot geometry. Data includes 
combined grade control and exploration assay data.  
6.7.  Ore-related hydrothermal alteration  
Potassic  hydrothermal  alteration  is  ubiquitous  in  host  rocks  and  synchronous 
with  ore  mineral  deposition  as  determined  from  micro-textural  relationships.  The 
hydrothermal alteration assemblage is defined as biotite + calcite ± muscovite ± quartz 
± pyrite ± tourmaline in the quartz-feldspar-porphyry (Fig. 12A-D) and biotite + calcite 
+ pyrite ± K-feldspar ± actinolite-tremolite ± quartz ± tourmaline ± pyrrhotite in marble 
(Fig. 12E-H). The pervasive biotite halo, surrounding the auriferous shear zones, in the 
country rocks extends beyond the extent of the current open pit. 
110

--- Page 129 ---
Biotite and muscovite developed along the shear fabric mantling phenocrysts in 
the  porphyry.    Biotite  preferentially  developed  in  calcitic  marble  and  marks  a  distinct 
foliation  that  overprints  the  porphyroblastic  growth  of  garnet,  clinopyroxene,  and 
actinolite-tremolite.  Phlogopite  formed  instead  of  biotite  in  the  dolomitic  marble 
horizons. Biotite also occurs as vein filling with variable amounts of quartz, calcite, K-
feldspar,  actinolite,  and  tourmaline  and  in  altered  wall  rocks  of  such  veins.  Pinkish 
calcite veins with actinolite-tremolite in selvages are well developed in the pit. Calcite is 
best-observed  in  the  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  closely  associated  with  disseminated 
biotite and/or as stringers with pyrite. Potassium-feldspar alteration occurs in the form 
of  fine-grained  poikiloblastic  microcline  and/or  orthoclase  intergrown  with  biotite, 
quartz,  and  calcite.  The  K-feldspar  grains  commonly  contain  minute  inclusions  of 
calcite and tourmaline. Tourmaline alteration is structurally-controlled and the mineral 
occurs  in  trace  amounts  to  abundances  of  as  much  as  5  %  of  the  rock.  Tourmaline  is 
observed as disseminated acicular masses and heart-shaped  mineral sections along the 
shear fabric with biotite, calcite, muscovite, and sulfides; as filling in quartz micro-veins 
and  narrow  vein  selvages;  and  as  rod-  and  heart-shaped  mineral  sections  intergrown 
with pyrite crystal aggregates.  
111

--- Page 130 ---
Figure  12.  Drill  core  photographs  and  micrographs  illustrating  the  potassic  hydrothermal 
alteration  assemblage  in  host  rocks.  A)  Sheared  quartz-feldspar-porphyry.  The  shear  foliation  is 
marked by biotite, calcite, quartz, and pyrite. B) Sheared quartz-feldspar-porphyry at contact with 
marble. Green actinolite flakes align along the fabric together with up to 5% pyrite. C) Feldspar 
phenocrysts are erased by sericitization while quartz phenocrysts are strained. Biotite, pyrite and 
accessory  tourmaline  align  along  the  shear  fabric.  D)  Muscovite  alteration  marks  the  S2  planar 
fabric.  Strained  and  assymetrical  quartz  phenocrysts  indicate  reverse  displacement  along  the 
fabric. E) Foliated, sulfidic marble. The fabric is marked by pyrite, biotite and quartz. F) Massive 
pyrite  ore  after  marble.  G)  A  tremolite  porphyroblast  is  overprinted  by  the  syn-tectonic  potassic 
assemblage in dolomitic marble. H) Zoned hydrothermal tourmalines closely associated with pyrite 
in marble. 
112

--- Page 131 ---
6.8.  Ore mineralogy  
The  shear-hosted  ore  largely  consists  of  pyrite  with  lesser  chalcopyrite  and 
pyrrhotite.  The  ore  also  contains  accessory  Ag-Sb-As-Hg-Bi-Te-Mo-W-Zn-Pb-Ni-Co-
U-bearing  mineral  species.  A  summary  of  the  ore  and  alteration  paragenesis  at 
Alamoutala is presented in Figure 13 and explained in detail below.  
Pyrite  is  the  dominant  sulfide  phase  at  Alamoutala  and  occurs  in  numerous  forms, 
including  single  euhedral  to  subhedral  crystals  (generally  50-250  µm),  crystal 
aggregates  (up  to  1  cm),  stringers,  and  massive  pyrite  (Fig.  14A).  Pyrrhotite  and 
chalcopyrite also are common ore phases. Pyrrhotite occurs as euhedral inclusions (2-10 
µm)  in  pyrite  and  single  crystals  closely  associated  with,  or  intergrown  with  pyrite 
grains (Fig. 14A). Chalcopyrite occurs throughout the ore paragenesis. It is dominantly 
observed  as  single  crystals  (15-50  µm)  infilling  pyrite  microfissures  (<15  µm)  or 
interstices between pyrite grains, and as overgrowths mantling on pyrite (Fig. 14A). A 
few minute chalcopyrite inclusions (2-10 µm) have been noted in pyrite.  
The  ore  also  includes  a  wide  range  of  accessory  minerals.  Arsenopyrite  is  present  in 
trace  amounts  as  euhedral  inclusions  (2-20  µm)  in  pyrite  and  single  fine-grained 
prismatic  crystals  (10-75  µm)  closely  associated  with  pyrite,  although  rarely  observed 
intergrown  (Fig.  14B).  Apatite  and  rutile  occur  throughout  the  ore  paragenesis. 
Monazite-(Ce) 
textural 
relationships  suggest 
it 
formed  syn- 
to  post-pyrite 
crystallization.  Tetrahedrite-tennantite  crystals  are  syn-  to  post-pyrite  formation  and 
exhibit growth zoning from tetrahedrite60-55tennantite40-45 core (Cu-As-Sb-rich pole) to 
tetrahedrite100  margins  (Cu-Sb-rich  pole).  Traces  of  molybdenite,  scheelite  and 
coloradoite  (HgTe)  are  found  as  fine-grained  subhedral  inclusions  in  pyrite.  Traces  of 
tellurobismuthite (Bi2Te3) and hessite (Ag2Te) grains occur in pyrite microfractures that 
are often associated with tetrahedrite and chalcopyrite. Trace amounts of sphalerite and 
galena  occur  as  subhedral  to  anhedral  grains  mantling  pyrite  and  as  infills  in  micro-
fractures and interstices between pyrite crystals (Fig. 14B). Trace millerite (NiS) grains 
are  enclosed  by  gersdorffite  (NiAsS),  which  itself  is  observed  mantling  pyrite  and 
chalcopyrite  crystals.  A  suite  of  antimony-bearing  minerals  is  also  present  in  trace 
amounts  and  consistently  deposited  late  in  the  paragenesis.  The  suite  includes,  in 
decreasing order of abundance, ullmannite (NiSbS), gudmundite (FeSbS), horobetsuite 
113

--- Page 132 ---
((Bi,Sb)2S3) 
and 
stibnite 
(Sb2S3).  Rare  uraninite 
(UO2) 
and 
synchysite 
((Ce,La)Ca(CO3)2F) grains exist as microscopic inclusions within pyrite or attached to 
its crystal edges. 
The  study  of  gold-bearing  phases  indicates  that  both  native  gold  (n=65%  modal 
volume)  and  electrum  (i.e.  gold  content  >25%)  (n=35%  modal  volume)  particles  are 
present in the ore and deposited as subhedral to anhedral inclusions and blebs (1-12 µm) 
in  pyrite  (50%;  G-I)  (Fig.  14C);  particles  attached  to  pyrite-tetrahedrite-chalcopyrite 
crystal faces, often within pressure shadow or at fracture termination (35%; G-II) (Fig. 
14D-E); and individual grains (1-5 µm) situated along deformation cracks in pyrite and 
rarely  in  tetrahedrite  (15%;  G-III)  (Fig.  14F).  Micro-analyses  of  gold  phases  reveal 
electrum  particles  to  contain  25  wt%  Ag  in  average,  whereas  gold  grains  vary  from 
native gold to particles containing up to 18 wt% Ag.  
A  suite  of  minerals  generally  observed  near  the  oxide-fresh  transition  zone 
formed by weathering of the hypogene ore and include marcassite, hematite, malachite-
azurite,  and  iron  hydroxides,  such  as  goethite  and  limonite.  The  oxide-fresh  transition 
zone is also marked in marbles by abundant karst features, such as dissolution vugs and 
cavities. 
114

--- Page 133 ---
Figure  13.  Ore  and  alteration  paragenetic  sequence  chart  for  the  Alamoutala  gold  deposit.  Note: 
Tetrahedrite = (Cu,Fe)12Sb4S13; Tennantite = (Cu,Fe)12As4S13; Stibnite = Sb2S3; Gudmundite = 
FeSbS;  Berthierite  =  FeSb2S4; Millerite  =  NiS; Ullmannite  =  NiSbS;  Tellurobismuthite  (Bi2Te3); 
Coloradoite = HgTe; Horobetsuite = (Bi,Sb)2S3; Hessite = Ag2Te; Uraninite = UO2 and Synchysite 
= (Ce,La)Ca(CO3)2F. 
115

--- Page 134 ---
Figure  14.  BSE  images  of  the  Alamoutala  ore  phases.  A)  Representative  ore  assemblage.  B) 
Arsenopyrite  is  an  accessory  ore  phase  and  deposited  pre-  to  syn-pyrite.  Sphalerite  minerals 
formed late in the paragenetic sequence. C) Gold bleb (~1-5 µm) enclosed in pyrite (G-I). D-E) Gold 
and/or electrum particles attached to sulfide and tetrahedrite crystal faces (G-II). F) Gold particles 
along deformation cracks in pyrite (G-III). 
116

--- Page 135 ---
7. Discussion 
7.1.  Towards a genetic model for the Alamoutala gold deposit 
The  geological  setting  of  the  Alamoutala  gold  deposit  is  analogous  to  that  of 
magnetite  skarns  of  the  Falémé  iron  district  as  described  in  Schwartz  and  Melcher 
(2004).  The  mineralogy,  whole  rock  geochemistry,  and  emplacement  age  of  the 
Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  bodies  are  consistent  with  that  of  the  Falémé 
plutons  (e.g.,  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004).  The  silicate  and 
oxide mineral association of endoskarn and exoskarn at Alamoutala indicates an overall 
oxidized  magmatic-hydrothermal  fluid  (e.g.,  formation  of  Fe3+-bearing  andradite, 
relative  abundance  of  magnetite,  garnet  >>  pyroxene)  and  a  shallow  crustal  level  of 
emplacement  (≤5  km)  (e.g.,  Meinert,  2000;  Meinert  et  al.,  2005).  The  Alamoutala 
magnetite skarns, however, have never been of economic interest. The data presented in 
this study suggest that the Alamoutala deposit contains an early and locally-developed 
magnetite-bearing skarn that was overprinted by regional orogenic gold mineralization. 
This  interpretation  is  supported  by  micro-textural  evidence  that  indicates  that  the  ore-
forming  process  must  have  taken  place,  at  least  in  part,  after  the  solidification  and 
cooling  of  the  pluton  because  shearing  generated  mineralized  proto-mylonite  zones  in 
the quartz-feldspar-porphyry stocks. Moreover, the bulk of the ore is shear-hosted and 
displays  no  vertical  or  lateral  zonation  of  metals  away  from  the  intrusive  contact  as 
commonly observed in magmatic-hydrothermal systems (e.g., Au-skarn, Meinert et al., 
2005; Cu-Au porphyry, Seedorff et al., 2005). It is likely that magmas, which exsolved 
a  magmatic-hydrothermal  fluid,  and  the  regional  gold-bearing  fluids  have  utilized  the 
same  fault  system  at  Alamoutala,  although  at  different  times.  Ore  fluids  were  most 
likely  concentrated  in  low  mean  stress  areas  surrounding  the  quartz-feldspar-porphyry 
stocks and in damage zones surrounding fault intersections. Nevertheless, the difficulty 
in  interpreting  the  Alamoutala  deposit  is  to  reconcile  the  thermal  disequilibrium 
between  country  rocks  at  regional  greenschist-facies  conditions  and  the  higher 
temperature  of  the  ore-related  hydrothermal  alteration  paragenesis  with  characteristics 
of orogenic gold deposits (e.g., Groves et al., 1998, 2003; Goldfarb et al., 2005). That 
thermal  disequilibrium,  however,  is  similar  to  data  reported  for  the  Sadiola  Hill  gold 
117

--- Page 136 ---
deposit (Masurel et al., in press) and is suggested to represent a transient thermal effect 
associated  with  syn-kinematic  igneous  activity  in  the  region  at  the  time  of 
mineralization (i.e. D3y).  
7.2. 
Integration  of  the  Alamoutala  deposit  with  regional  geology 
and tectonics 
 At  least  two  phases  of  folding  have  affected  country  rocks  at  the  Alamoutala 
gold deposit. The D1y early event may be correlated with the regional D1 responsible for 
the  formation  of  a  NNW-trending  structural  corridor  in  Mali  and  associated  WSW-
ENE-directed  shortening  (public  data  from  AMIRA  International,  West  African 
Initiative final report, 2013). The D1 deformation episode has been interpreted to have 
occurred between ca. 2160 and 2115 Ma (Ledru et al., 1991; Milési et al., 1992; Dabo 
and Aïfa, 2010, 2011; McFarlane et al., 2011; Diene et al., 2012; Gueye et al., 2008). At 
the regional scale D2y is compatible with a period of fold-and-thrust tectonics correlated 
with a region-wide compressive event (D2) (in Ivory Coast, Pouclet et al., 2006; Vidal et 
al., 2009; in Burkina Faso, Hein, 2010; in northern Guinea, Lahondère et al., 2002; in 
southern Mali, Liégeois et al., 1991; Milési et al., 1992; McFarlane et al., 2011; in the 
KKI,  Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010;  Diene  et  al.,  2012;  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a;  Treloar  et  al., 
2014; Masurel et al., in press). The Senegal-Mali Shear Zone is inferred to have formed 
as  a  transpressional  fault  during  D2  deformation,  coeval  with  development  of  the  S2 
penetrative  cleavage  (Liégeois  et  al.,  1991;  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  The  Alamoutala 
quartz-feldspar-porphyry  stocks  emplaced  in  the  upper  crust  syn-D2y  but  were  sheared 
subsequently  during  D3y.  The  economic  gold  mineralization  at  Alamoutala  formed 
during  D3y  coeval  with  sinistral  displacement  along  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and 
Alamoutala Fracture Zone. The similar relative timing and structural setting between the 
Alamoutala  gold  deposit  and  other  deposits  of  the  KKI  (e.g.,  Loulo,  Lawrence  et  al., 
2013a; Massawa, Treloar et al., 2014; Sadiola Hill, Masurel et al., in press) suggest that 
gold mineralization in the region occurred during a period of transcurrent tectonics that 
outlasted  emplacement  of  the  Falémé-type  granitoids,  after  the  cessation  of  regional 
compressional deformation. The D2y and D3y events likely represent the local expression 
of  regional  deformation  (D2-D3)  associated  with  the  Eburnean  orogeny  and  were 
118

--- Page 137 ---
undoubtedly  responsible  for  the  formation  of  map-scale  structures.  Syn-tectonic 
magmatic suites with arc-related geochemical signatures have been described to intrude 
the KKI volcano-sedimentary country rocks between ca. 2115 and 2070 Ma (Hirdes and 
Davis,  2002;  Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004;  Pawlig  et  al.,  2006;  Gueye  et  al.,  2007, 
2008). The REE signature and calc-alkaline affinity of the Alamoutala quartz-feldspar-
porphyry stocks are consistent with data reported for other Eburnean granitoids of the 
Falémé belt (e.g., Schwartz and Melcher, 2004; Dioh et al., 2006; Lambert-Smith, 2014) 
and  suggests  derivation  from  either  a  metasomatized  mantle  source  with  crustal 
contamination  (e.g.,  Egal  et  al.,  2002)  or  melting  of  an  enriched  lower-crustal  garnet-
amphibolite source (e.g., Doumbia et al., 1998; Pouclet et al., 2006). It is possible that 
the late Eburnean magmatic activity helped generate increased thermal gradients, which 
could have produced regional fluid systems capable of transporting gold (e.g., Oberthür 
et al., 1998). Additional geochronology and metamorphic data for the KKI will help to 
better understand the tectono-thermal evolution of the inlier.  
8. Conclusions 
Recent  research  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  KKI  has  highlighted  the  spatial 
association between calc-alkaline Eburnean plutons, gold mineralization, and local iron 
skarn  mineralization,  suggesting  a  complex  fluid  evolution  in  relation  to  the 
development of major gold deposits (e.g., Lawrence et al., 2013a, b). The emplacement 
of Eburnean quartz-feldspar-porphyry stocks in the Alamoutala deposit area resulted in 
the  formation  of  a  low  P-high  T  magnetite-bearing  skarn  in  a  geological  setting 
analogous  to  that  of  the  Falémé  iron  skarns  (e.g.,  Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004).  The 
gold  mineralization  is  shear-hosted  and  occured  subsequently  during  a  period  of 
transcurrent 
tectonics,  and 
thus  overprints 
the  contact-metamorphic  mineral 
assemblages. The current study indicates that the magmatic episode occurred at 2083 ± 
7 Ma, and thus regional orogenic gold mineralization is younger than this age.  
119

--- Page 139 ---
eburnéenne  (Protérozoïque  inférieur):  Journal  of  African  Earth  Sciences,  v.  6,  p.  505-
519. 
Bassot, J.P., and Dommanget, A., 1986, Mise en évidence d’un accident majeur affectant le 
Protérozoïque inférieur des confins sénégalo-maliens: Comptes Rendus Géosciences, v. 
302, p. 1101–1106. 
Bassot,  J.P.,  and  Caen-Vachette,  M.,  1984,  Données  géochronologiques  et  géochimiques 
nouvelles sur les granitoïdes de l'Est du Sénégal: Implications sur l'histoire géologique 
du  Birimien  de  cette  région,  in  Klerkx,  J.,  and  Michot,  J.,  eds.,  African  Geology: 
Belgium, Tervuren, p. 196-209. 
Boher,  M.,  Abouchami,  W.,  Michard,  A.,  Albarede,  F.,  and  Arndt,  N.T.,  1992,  Crustal 
Growth in West Africa at 2.1 Ga: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 97, p. 345-369. 
Calvez,  J.Y.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  and  Milesi,  J.P.,  1990,  Géochronologie  du 
Proterozoique  inferieur  du  craton  ouest  africain  (methode  d’évaporation  directe  de 
zircons  isolés)  [abs]:  13e  Réunion  des  Sciences  de  la  Terre,  Grenoble,  France, 
Conference  proceedings;  in  Milési,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  Dommanget,  A., 
Quedraogo, M.F., Marcoux, E., Prost, A., Vinchon, C., Sylvain, J.P., Johan, V., Tegyey, 
M.,  Calvez,  J.Y.,  and  Lagny,  P.,  1989,  Les  minéralisations  aurifères  de  l’Afrique  de 
l’Ouest  et  leurs  relations  avec  l’évolution  lithostructurale  au  Protérozoique  inférieur: 
Chronique de la Recherche Minière, v. 497, p. 3-98. 
Compston,  W.,  Williams,  I.S.,  and  Meyer,  C.,  1984,  U–Pb  geochronology  of  zircons  from 
lunar breccia  73217  using  a sensitive high  mass-resolution ion microprobe: Journal of 
Geophysical Research, v. 89, p. B252–B534. 
Cox,  K.G.,  Bell,  J.D.,  and  Pankhurst,  R.J.,  1979,  The  interpretation  of  igneous  rocks  in 
Rollinson, H., Using Geochemical Data: evaluation, presentation and interpretation, p. 
51-52. 
Dabo, M., and  Aïfa, T., 2011, Late Eburnean deformation in the Kolia-Boboti sedimentary 
basin,  Kédougou-Kéniéba  Inlier,  Senegal:  Journal  of  African  Earth  Sciences,  v.  60,  p. 
106-116. 
Dabo,  M.,  and    Aïfa,  T.,  2010,  Structural  styles  and  tectonic  evolution  of  the  Kolia-Boboti 
sedimentary  Basin,  Kédougou-Kéniéba  inlier,  eastern  Senegal:  Comptes  Rendus 
Geoscience, v. 342, p. 796-805. 
Debat, P., Nikiéma, S., Mercier, A., Lompo, M., Béziat, D., Bourges, F., Roddaz, M., Salvi, 
S.,  Tollon,  F.,  and  Wenmenga,  U.,  2003,  A  new  metamorphic  constraint  for  the 
121

--- Page 140 ---
Eburnean orogeny from Palaeoproterozoic formations of the Man shield (Aribinda and 
Tampelga countries, Burkina Faso): Precambrian Research,  v. 123, p. 47–65. 
Debat, P., Diallo, D.P., Ngom, P.M., Rollet, M., and  Seyler, M., 1984, La série de Mako dans 
ses parties centrale et méridionale (Sénégal Oriental, Afrique de l'ouest). Précisions sur 
l'évolution  de  la  série  volcanosédimentaire  et  données  géochimiques  préliminaires  sur 
les formations magmatiques post-tectoniques: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 2, p. 
71-79. 
Dia, A., 1988, Caractéres et signification des complexes magmatiques et métamorphiques du 
secteur  de  Sandikounda-Laminia  (Nord  de  la  boutonnière  de  Kédougou,  Est  du 
Sénégal):  un  modèle  géodynamique  du  Birimien  de  l'Afrique  de  l'Ouest:  Unpublished 
Ph.D. thesis, Sénégal, Université de Dakar, 350 p. 
Dia,  A.,  Van  Schmus,  W.R.,  and    Kröner,  A.,  1997,  Isotopic  constraints  on  the  age  and 
formation of a Palaeoproterozoic volcanic arc complex in the Kedougou Inlier, eastern 
Senegal, West Africa: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 24, p. 197-213. 
Diene, M., Gueye, M., Diallo, D.P., and  Dia, A., 2012, Structural Evolution of a Precambrian 
Segment:  Example  of  the  Paleoproterozoic  Formations  of  the  Mako  Belt  (Eastern 
Senegal, West Africa): International Journal of Geosciences, v. 03, p. 153-165. 
Dioh,  E.,  Béziat,  D.,  Debat,  P.,  Grégoire,  M.,  and    Ngom,  P.M.,  2006,  Diversity  of  the 
Palaeoproterozoic  granitoids  of  the  Kédougou  inlier  (eastern  Senegal):  Petrographical 
and geochemical constraints: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 44, p. 351-371. 
Doumbia,  S.,  Pouclet,  A.,  Kouamelan,  A.,  Peucat,  J.J.,  Vidal,  M.,  and  Delor,  C.,  1998, 
Petrogenesis  of  juvenile-type  Birimian  (Paleoproterozoic)  granitoids  in  Central  Côte-
d'Ivoire, West Africa: geochemistry and geochronology: Precambrian  Research, v. 87, 
p. 33-63. 
Egal,  E.,  Thiéblemont,  D.,  Lahondère,  D.,  Guerrot,  C.,  Costea,  C.A.,  Iliescu,  D.,  Delor,  C., 
Goujou, J.C., Lafon, J.M., Tegyey, M., Diaby, S., and  Kolié, P., 2002, Late Eburnean 
granitization  and  tectonics  along  the  western  and  northwestern  margin  of  the  Archean 
Kénéma–Man domain (Guinea, West African Craton): Precambrian Research, v. 117, p. 
57-84. 
Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Baker,  T.,  Dubé,  B.,  Groves,  D.I.,  Hart,  C.J.R.,  and  Gosselin,  P.,  2005, 
Distribution, character, and genesis of gold deposits in metamorphic terranes: Economic 
Geology 100th Anniversary Volume, p. 407–450. 
122

--- Page 141 ---
Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Gebre-Mariam,  M.,  Hagemann,  S.G.,  and  Robert,  F.,  1998, 
Orogenic  gold  deposits:  A  proposed  classification  in  the  context  of  their  crustal 
distribution and relationship to other gold deposit types: Ore Geology Reviews, v. 13, p. 
7-27. 
Groves,  D.I.,  Goldfarb,  R.J.,  Robert,  F.,  and    Hart,  C.J.R.,  2003,  Gold  Deposits  in 
Metamorphic Belts: Overview of Current Understanding, Outstanding Problems, Future 
Research, and Exploration Significance: Economic Geology, v. 98, p. 1-29. 
Gueye, M., Ngom, P.M., Diène, M., Thiam, Y., Siegesmund, S., Wemmer, K., and Pawlig, S., 
2008, Intrusive rocks and tectono-metamorphic evolution of the Mako Paleoproterozoic 
belt (Eastern Senegal, West Africa): Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 50, p. 88-110. 
Gueye, M., Siegesmund, S., Wemmer, K., Pawlig, S., Drobe, M., Nolte, N., and  Layer, P., 
2007,  New  evidences  for  an  early  Birimian  evolution in the  West African Craton: An 
example  from  the  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  southeast  Senegal:  South  African  Journal 
of Geology, v. 110, p. 511-534. 
Hein,  K.A.A.,  2010,  Succession  of  structural  events  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  (Burkina 
Faso): Implications for West African tectonics: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 56, 
p. 83-94. 
Hirdes, W., and  Davis, D.W., 2002, U–Pb Geochronology of Paleoproterozoic Rocks in the 
Southern  Part  of  the  Kedougou-Kéniéba  Inlier,  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Evidence  for 
Diachronous  Accretionary  Development  of  the  Eburnean  Province:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 118, p. 83-99. 
IAMGold,  2015,  public  data  from  http://www.iamgold.com/English/Operations/Operating-
Mines/Yatela-GoldMine. 
Irvine,  T.N.,  and  Baragar,  W.R.A.,  1971,  a  guide  to  the  geochemical  classification  of  the 
common volcanic rocks: Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, v. 8, p. 523-548.  
Lahondère,  D.,  Thiéblemont,  D.,  Tegyey,  M.,  Guerrot,  C.,  and  Diabate,  B.,  2002,  First 
evidence of early Birimian (2.21 Ga) volcanic activity in Upper Guinea: The volcanics 
and associated rocks of the Niani suite: Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 35, p. 417–
431. 
Lambert-Smith, J., 2014, The geology, structure and metallogenesis of the world class Loulo-
Bambadji  Au  district  in  Mali  and  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Kingston 
University, London, 346 p. 
123

--- Page 142 ---
Lawrence,  D.  M.,  2010,  Characterization  and  evolution  of  Au  mineralization  in  the  Loulo 
mining district, western Mali: Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, London, Kingston University, 
341 p. 
Lawrence,  D.M.,  Treloar,  P.J.,  Rankin,  A.H.,  Boyce,  A.,  and    Harbidge,  P.,  2013b,  A  Fluid 
Inclusion  and  Stable  Isotope  Study  at  the  Loulo  Mining  District,  Mali,  West  Africa: 
Implications  for  Multifluid  Sources  in  the  Generation  of  Orogenic  Gold  Deposits: 
Economic Geology, v. 108, p. 229-257. 
Lawrence,  D.M.,  Treloar,  P.J.,  Rankin,  A.H.,  Harbidge,  P.,  and  Holliday,  J.,  2013a,  The 
Geology and Mineralogy of the Loulo Mining District, Mali, West Africa: Evidence for 
Two  Distinct  Styles  of  Orogenic  Gold  Mineralization:  Economic  Geology,  v.  108,  p. 
199-227. 
Ledru,  P.,  Pons,  J.,  Milesi,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  and  Johan,  V.,  1991,  Transcurrent  tectonics 
and  polycyclic  evolution  in  the  Lower  proterozoic  of  Senegal-Mali:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 50, p. 337-354. 
Liégeois, J.P., Claessens, W., Camara, D., and Klerkx, J., 1991, Short-lived Eburnian orogeny 
in  southern  Mali.  Geology,  tectonics,  U-Pb  and  Rb-Sr  geochronology:  Precambrian 
Research, v. 50, p. 111-136. 
Ludwig,  K.R.,  2003,  Isoplot  3.0;  a  geochronological  toolkit  for  Microsoft  Excel:  Berkeley 
Geochronology Centre Special Publication, v.4, 70 p.  
Ludwig,  K.R.,  2009,  Squid  2.50,  A  User’s  Manual:  Unpublished  report  by  Berkeley 
Geochronology Centre, California, USA, 95 p. 
Masurel,  Q.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Miller,  J.,  Ulrich,  S.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  Cameron,  G.,  Béziat,  D., 
Bruguier, O., and Davis, J.A., 2015, Sadiola Hill: a world-class carbonate-hosted gold 
deposit in Mali, West Africa: Economic Geology, this volume. 
McFarlane,  C.R.M.,  Mavrogenes,  J.,  Lentz,  D.,  King,  K.,  Allibone,  A.,  and  Holcombe,  R., 
2011, Geology and Intrusion-Related Affinity of the Morila Gold Mine, Southeast Mali: 
Economic Geology, v. 106, p. 727-750. 
Meinert,  L.D.,  Dipple,  G.M.,  and    Nicolescu,  S.,  2005,  World  Skarn  Deposits:  Economic 
Geology, 100th Anniversary Volume, p. 299-336. 
Meinert,  L.D.,  2000,  Gold  in  skarns  related  to  epizonal  intrusions:  Reviews  in  Economic 
Geology, v. 13, p. 347–375. 
Meinert, L.D., 1992, Skarns and skarn deposits, Geoscience Canada, v. 19, p. 145-162. 
124

--- Page 143 ---
Milési,  J.P.,  Ledru,  P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Dommanget,  A.,  and    Marcoux,  E.,  1992,  Early 
Proterozoic  ore  deposits  and  tectonics  of  the  Birimian  orogenic  belt,  West  Africa: 
Precambrian Research, v. 58, p. 305-344. 
Ndiaye, P.M., Dia, A., Vialette, Y., Diallo, D.P., Ngom, P.M., Sylla, M., Wade, S., and  Dioh, 
E.,  1997,  Données  pétrographiques,  géochimiques  et  géochronologiques  nouvelles  sur 
les  granitoïdes  du  Paléoprotérozoïque  du  Supergroupe  de  Dialé-Daléma  (Senégal 
Oriental):  Implications  pétrogénétiques  et  géodynamiques:  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences, v. 25, p. 193-208. 
Oberthür,  T.,  Vetter,  U.,  Davis,  D.W.,  and  Amanor,  J.A.,  1998,  Age  constraints  on  gold 
mineralization  and  Paleoproterozoic  crustal  evolution  in  the  Ashanti  belt  of  southern 
Ghana: Precambrian Research, v. 89, p. 129-143. 
Pawlig, S., Gueye, M., Klischies, R., Schwarz, S., Wemmer, K., and  Siegesmund, S., 2006, 
Geochemical and Sr-Nd isotopic data on the Birimian of the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier 
(Eastern Senegal): Implications on the Palaeoproterozoic evolution of the West African 
Craton: South African Journal of Geology, v. 109, p. 411-427. 
Pouclet,  A.,  Doumbia,  S.,  and  Vidal,  M.,  2006,  Geodynamic  setting  of  the  Birimian 
volcanism in central Ivory Coast (western Africa) and its place in the Palaeoproterozoic 
evolution  of  the  Man  Shield:  Bulletin  de  la  Société  Géologique  de  France,  v.  177,  p. 
105-121. 
Schwartz,  M.O.,  and    Melcher,  F.,  2004,  The  Falémé  Iron  District,  Senegal:  Economic 
Geology, v. 99, p. 917-939. 
Seedorff, E., Dilles, J.H., Proffett, J.M., Einaudi, M.T., Zurcher, L., Stavast, W.J.A., Johnson, 
D. A., and Barton, D., 2005, Porphyry Deposits: Characteristic and Origin of Hypogene 
Features: Economic Geology 100th Anniversary Volume, p. 251–298. 
Stacey, J.S., and Kramers, J.D, 1975, Approximation of terrestrial lead isotope evolution by a 
two-stage model: Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 26, p. 207–221. 
Stern,  R.A.,  2001,  A  new  isotopic  and  trace-element  standard  for  the  ion  microprobe: 
preliminary  thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry  (TIMS)  U–Pb  and  electron-
microprobe data: Geological Survey of  Canada, Radiogenic Age and Isotopic  Studies, 
Report 14, Current Research 2001-F1, 11 p.  
Stern, R.A., Bodorkos, S., Kamo, S.L., Hickman, A.H., and Corfu, F., 2009, Measurement of 
SIMS 
instrumental  mass  fractionation  of  Pb 
isotopes  during  zircon  dating: 
Geostandards and Geoanalytical Research, v. 33, p. 145–168. 
125

--- Page 144 ---
Sun,  S.S.,  and  McDonough,  W.F.,  1989,  Chemical  and  isotopic  systematics  of  oceanic 
basalts:  implications  for  mantle  composition  and  processes,  in  Saunders,  A.  D.,  and 
Norry, M.J. (eds), Magmatism in ocean basins: Geological Society Special Publication, 
v. 42, p. 313-345.  
Treloar, P.J., Lawrence, D.M., Senghor, D., Boyce, A., and Harbidge, P., 2014, The Massawa 
gold  deposit,  Eastern  Senegal,  West  Africa:  an  orogenic  gold  deposit  sourced  from 
magmatically derived fluids?: Geological Society, London, Special Publications. 
Vidal,  M.,  Gumiaux,  C.,  Cagnard,  F.,  Pouclet,  A.,  Ouattara,  G.,  and  Pichon,  M.,  2009, 
Evolution of a Paleoproterozoic “weak type” orogeny in the West African Craton (Ivory 
Coast): Tectonophysics, v. 477, p. 145-159. 
Wingate,  M.T.D.,  and  Kirkland,  C.L.,  2013,  Introduction  to  geochronology  information: 
Geological Survey of Western Australia Publication, 5 p. 
Yavuz, F., 2013, WinPyrox - a Windows program for pyroxene calculation, classification and 
thermobarometry: American Mineralogist, v. 98, p. 1338-1359.  
11. 
Supplementary material  
11.1.  Lithogeochemsitry  data  for  igneous  rocks  of  the  Alamoutala 
open pit. 
11.2.  Sensitive  high  resolution 
ion  microprobe 
(SHRIMP) 
analytical  results 
for 
the  Alamoutala  quartz-feldspar-
porphyry. 
11.3.  Representative  electron  probe  micro-analyses  of  pyroxene  in 
endoskarn. 
126

--- Page 145 ---
127

--- Page 146 ---
128

--- Page 147 ---
129

--- Page 148 ---
130

--- Page 149 ---
Chapter  IV.  The  Yatela  gold  deposit  in  Mali,  West 
Africa:  the  final  product  of  a  long-lived  history  of 
hydrothermal alteration and weathering. 
Quentin  Masurela*,  John  Millera,  Kim  A.A.  Heinb,  Eric  Hanssenc,  Nicolas  Thébauda,  Stanislav 
Ulrichd, Jean Kaisine, Samuel Tessouguef 
aCentre for Exploration Targeting, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, 
WA, Australia. 
*Corresponding author, Ph: +61864885809, E-mail:  qmasurel@hotmail.com 
bUniversity of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. 
cLegend Gold Corporation, Vancouver, British Columbia. 
dAngloGold Ashanti Australia Limited, Perth, WA. 
eSociété Minière de la Vallée du Fleuve Sénégal. 
fSociété des Mines d’Or du Mali, Sadiola-Yatela gold mines. 
Keywords:  Kédougou-Kénieba 
inlier,  Yatela,  carbonate-hosted  gold,  auriferous 
residuum 
1. Abstract 
The  Yatela  gold  deposit  is  located  in  the  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier  (KKI),  a 
window  of  ca.  2200-2050  Ma  rocks  that  are  exposed  in  eastern  Senegal  and  western 
Mali.  The  geology  of  the  KKI  differs  from  other  Paleoproterozoic  granite-greenstone 
belts and sedimentary basins by the abundance of carbonate rocks. The Yatela deposit 
occurs within 8 km of the regional-scale Senegal-Mali Shear Zone. Country rocks in the 
Yatela region have been subjected to polycyclic deformation and regional greenschist-
facies metamorphism. A syn-kinematic diorite stock has intruded the metasedimentary 
sequences in the open pit and is associated with a hornblende-hornfels contact aureole. 
Field relationships and micro-textural data indicate that the primary gold mineralisation 
is  shear-hosted.  The  similar  relative  timing  and  structural  setting  between  the  Yatela 
primary  gold  mineralisation  and  other  world-class  deposits  in  the  region  (e.g.,  Loulo, 
Lawrence et al., 2013a; Massawa, Treloar et al.,  2014; Sadiola  Hill, Masurel et al., in 
131

--- Page 150 ---
press)  suggest  that  regional  orogenic  gold  mineralisation  occurred  during  a  period  of 
transcurrent  tectonics,  after  the  cessation  of  regional  compressional  deformation.  The 
primary  gold  mineralisation  at  Yatela,  however,  is  low-grade  and  sub-economic.  It  is 
hosted  by  marbles  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  diorite.  The  primary  ore  is  pyrite-rich,  with 
abundant  chalcopyrite,  minor  arsenopyrite  and  accessory  Zn-Pb-Sb-Fe-Ag-Co-Ni-
bearing  mineral  species.  Post-Birimian  surficial  dissolution  of  hydrothermally  altered 
and mineralised host marbles resulted in the creation of troughs, which were draped and 
infilled  with  a  ferruginous  dissolution  residue  enriched  in  gold.  This  auriferous 
residuum  formed  the  economic  resource  mined  at  Yatela  until  decommissioning  in 
2013.  The  Yatela  gold  deposit  is  unique  with  respect  to  mineralisation  types 
encountered  in  West  Africa  because  an  auriferous  residuum  of  economic  interest  (>1 
Moz)  derives  from  an  underlying  sub-economic  Birimian  occurrence.  This  study 
provides  a  new  appreciation  for  the  economic  interest  of  Yatela-style  orebodies  and 
their prospectivity in other gold provinces of the West African Craton where carbonates 
are  present,  such  as  in  the  Siguiri  basin  in  Guinea  and  the  Ity  region  in  western  Côte 
d’Ivoire.  
2. Introduction 
The KKI is the westernmost exposure (~22000 km2) of Paleoproterozoic crust in 
the  West  African  Craton.  It  hosts  a  number  of  world-class  mining  districts,  which 
include Loulo-Gounkoto (~14 Moz), Sadiola-Yatela (~10 Moz) and Sabodala-Massawa 
(~8  Moz).  Gold  deposits  occur  in  a  wide  range  of  host  rocks  that  include  mafic 
volcanics,  detrital  sedimentary  rocks  and  carbonates,  and  share  a  similar  structural 
setting  and  relative  timing  to  other  world-class  orogenic  gold  systems  in  the  West 
African Craton (e.g., Ashanti, Morila) (Oberthür et al., 1998; Allibone et al., 2002a, b; 
Feybesse et al., 2006; McFarlane et al., 2011; Lawrence et al., 2013a, b; Treloar et al., 
2014; Masurel et al., in press). The Yatela gold deposit, however, is unique in the KKI 
and, to a larger extent, in the West African Craton because the gold resource is hosted in 
an auriferous residuum derived from an underlying sub-economic Birimian occurrence 
(Hanssen et al., 2004). The gold-enriched dissolution residue lined the bottom of deep 
troughs developed over the carbonates and formed the economic resource until the mine 
132

--- Page 151 ---
was decommissioned. A recent study by Hein et al. (in press) examined the geological 
history of the auriferous residuum through mineralogical, textural and geochronological 
investigations,  and  suggested  that:  1)  the  auriferous  residuum  consists  of  a  mixture  of 
underlying  insoluble  bedrock  fragments  (e.g.,  metagreywacke,  marble,  metadiorite), 
blocks  and  pebbles  of  Neoproterozoic  sandstone,  and  quartz  fragments  and  pebbles, 
which  are  set  into  a  brown-red  sandy  matrix;  2)  the  maximum  deposition  age  for  the 
auriferous residuum is constrained in the Neoproterozoic, or during early deposition of 
the Taoudeni sandstone; 3) the formation of the residuum likely involved a local source 
that included recycled material based on gold grain morphology and detrital zircon ages; 
and  4)  the  creation  of  a  deep  weathering  profile  and  supergene  enrichment  of  the 
auriferous residuum may have taken place during the mid-Cretaceous to early Tertiary. 
In this study, we summarise the geology, tectonic setting, hydrothermal alteration, and 
ore  mineralogy  of  the  primary  gold  mineralisation  at  Yatela  with  the  objective  of 
defining  its  link  to  the  auriferous  residuum,  and  thus  form  the  basis  of  an  ore  genetic 
model for the deposit. 
3. Background 
3.1.  Regional geology 
The  geology  of  the  KKI  consists  of  linear  volcano-plutonic  belts  and 
sedimentary basins, which are separated by the Main Transcurrent Zone (MTZ, Ledru et 
al.,  1991)  and  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  (SMSZ,  Bassot  and  Dommanget,  1986) 
(Fig. 1). It differs from other Paleoproterozoic terranes by the abundance of carbonates, 
with  thick  sequences  (>250  m)  in  the  Dialé-Daléma  and  Kofi  Series  representing  the 
most extensive carbonate exposure in the Birimian of West Africa (Fig. 1) (Bosse et al., 
1996;  Bering  et  al.,  1998).  Rocks  of  the  Dialé-Daléma  Series  (Fig.  1)  include 
volcaniclastics,  arenites,  wackes,  siltstones,  argillites,  and  carbonates  with  minor 
intercalations  of  andesite  lavas  and  rhyolite  pyroclastites  (Bassot,  1987;  Dia,  1988; 
Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002).  Wackes  and  immature  sediments  are  more  widespread 
towards the margins of the basin (Hirdes et al., 2002). Rocks of the Kofi Series (Fig. 1) 
consist  of  volcaniclastics,  arenites,  wackes,  carbonates,  siltstones,  and  argillites 
133

--- Page 152 ---
(Lawrence et al., 2013a; Masurel et al., in press). The Dialé-Daléma and Kofi have been 
interpreted  to  represent  syn-deformational  foreland  basins  (e.g.,  Hirdes  and  Davis, 
2002; Gueye et al., 2008). Four deformation episodes have been identified in the KKI 
and include early thrusting events associated with crustal thickening (D1-D2), followed 
by  two  transcurrent  events  (D3-D4)  accomodating  oblique  convergence  (Ledru  et  al., 
1991;  Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010,  2011;  Diene  et  al.,  2012).  Little  is 
known  about  the  earliest  event  (D1)  due  to  pervasive  reworking  by  subsquent 
deformation. The D2 and D3 events mark the principal imprint of the Eburnean orogeny 
(ca. 2115-2050 Ma) in the eastern part of the KKI and are undoubtedly responsible for 
the formation of map-scale structures (Lawrence et al., 2013a; Masurel et al., in press). 
The  second  event  (D2)  is  associated  with  the  formation  of  the  SMSZ  as  a  sinistral 
transpressional  fault  under  NW-SE  directed  shortening  (Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a). 
Hydrothermal  fluid  flow  and  regional  orogenic  gold  mineralisation  along  the  SMSZ 
(e.g, Loulo, Gounkoto, Sadiola Hill) (Fig. 1) occurred subsequently during the D3 event, 
which marked a switch from a dominantly coaxial system to a non-coaxial deformation 
regime  (Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a;  Masurel  et  al.,  in  press).  The  last  deformation  event 
(D4)  has  been  locally  reported  in  the  Loulo  deposit  area  and  is  correlated  with  the 
dextral  reactivation  of  the  earlier  accretionary  structures.  Available  metamorphic  data 
indicate  regional  peak  metamorphic  conditions  reached  greenschist-facies  (e.g.,  Dia  et 
al.,  1997;  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Gueye  et  al.,  2008)  with  local  hornblende-hornfels 
contact  aureoles  surrounding  Eburnean  granitoids  (Debat  et  al.,  1984;  Pawlig  et  al., 
2006; Masurel et al., in press).  
134

--- Page 153 ---
Figure 1. Geologic map of the Birimian Kédougou-Kéniéba Inlier (1:250,000 scale, modified after 
Gueye et al., 2007; Lawrence et al., 2013a). Geochronological constraints after Dia, 1988; Calvez et 
al., 1990; Dia et al., 1997; Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Gueye et al., 2007). Inset map shows the geologic 
setting of the West African Craton (modified after Boher et al., 1992). The Falémé River forms the 
international border with Senegal to the west and Mali to the east and north. 
135

--- Page 154 ---
3.2. 
 Local geology 
The geology of the Yatela deposit area is characteristic of the Kofi Series (e.g., 
Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a)  and  consists  of  feldspathic  wackes,  arkosic  arenites,  and 
carbonates with subordinate rhyolite flows and pyroclastites to the west progressing to 
siltstones  and  argillites  further  east  (Fig.  2).  Chemical  and  detrital  sedimentary  rocks 
transition towards the west into a linear volcano-sedimentary belt that consists of calc-
alkaline  volcaniclastic  rocks  and  porphyritic  andesites  with  subordinate  rhyolite  flows 
and  pyroclastites  (Masurel  et  al.,  in  press)  (Fig.  2).  The  original  lithostratigraphy  has 
been complicated by folding and thrusting during the Eburnean orogeny. A number of 
syn-kinematic  elliptic  to  oval-shaped  plutons  have  intruded  the  volcano-sedimentary 
rocks  in  the  Yatela  deposit  area.  These  intrusions  have  a  calc-alkaline  affinity  and 
exhibit  a  differentiated  trend  from  hornblende-monzodiorite  to  biotite-granodiorite 
(Masurel et al., in press). Deformed Birimian rocks are unconformably overlain to the 
east by flat-lying Neoproterozoic cover sequences locally  referred to as the Seroukoto 
sandstone (Fig. 2).  
136

--- Page 155 ---
Figure 2. Geology of the Sadiola-Yatela mining and exploration permit based on SEMOS regional 
map (2014) and field investigation by the authors (scale 1:35,000). 
137

--- Page 156 ---
3.3.  The Yatela gold resource 
The Yatela gold mine is located 25 km north of the world-class Sadiola Hill gold 
mine  in  southwest  Mali  (Fig.  2).  Economic  mineralisation  at  Yatela  occurs  in  a 
saprolitic  residuum  that  lines  the  bottom  of  deep  troughs  (max.  depth  of  220  m) 
developed  over  carbonate  rocks  (Hein  et  al.,  in  press).  The  residuum  consists  of  a 
mixture  of  underlying 
insoluble  Paleoproterozoic  bedrock 
fragments 
(e.g., 
metagreywacke, marble, metadiorite), blocks and pebbles of Neoproterozoic sandstone, 
quartz  fragments  and  pebbles,  and  gossanous  fragments  derived  from  the  primary 
hypogene mineralisation, which are set into a clay-rich ferruginous matrix (Hanssen et 
al., 2004). Recent research by Hein et al. (in press) presented evidence for two types of 
gold  in  the  auriferous  residuum.  The  bulk  of  the  ore  is  associated  with  40  to  450  µm 
long,  irregular  (e.g.,  dendritic  to  wire-like  forms),  angular  gold  grains.  These  grains 
occur in micro-fractures of angular quartz fragments and partly oxidised pyrite grains, 
suggesting a proximal source. A minor part of the ore is associated with 275 to 315 µm 
long,  rounded  detrital  gold  grains  that  exhibit  abraded  surfaces  and  Ag-depleted  rims 
(gold fineness 981-1000), suggesting a more distal source. The mine production started 
in 2001 and as of 2010, the Yatela gold deposit (oxidised and partly oxidised orebody) 
had  total  mineral  resources  of  1.18  million  tonnes  at  average  grade  of  2.56  g/t  Au 
(public  data  from  AngloGold  Ashanti  Ltd.  mineral  resource  and  ore  reserve  report 
2010). The Yatela mining operations have been managed by the Société des Mines d’Or 
du  Mali  (SEMOS),  a  joint  venture  between  AngloGold  Ashanti  Limited,  IAMGold 
Corporation  and  the  government  of  Mali.  As  of  2012  (near  the  end  of  mining  of  the 
oxidised and partly oxidised orebody), the primary gold mineralisation was evaluated to 
be sub-economic and the subsequent drop in the spot price of gold and the reduction of 
the  profit  margin  led  to  the  closure  of  the  Yatela  gold  mine  (IAMGold  news  release, 
September 2013). 
138

--- Page 157 ---
4. Methodology 
4.1.  Pit mapping, drill core logging, sampling and 3D modelling  
Systematic face mapping was conducted on all accessible ramps and benches of 
the  Yatela  open  pit  where  fresh  rocks  are  exposed.  As  of  2013,  the  main  open  pit  is 
1,300 m in length, 600 m wide and 220 m deep. Detailed logging was undertaken and 
included  five  diamond  drill  holes  chosen  to  represent  the  main  structural,  lithological 
and mineralogical variations observed in the deposit. Petrographic data reported in this 
paper investigates primary mineralisation and therefore largely relies on deep diamond 
drill  core  samples.  All  structural  readings  are  given  in  true  north  coordinates.  Planar 
features are given in strike/dip/quadrant and linear data is given as plunge and azimuth. 
In  this  paper,  the  “y”  subscript  indicates  that  the  considered  structural  event  is  only 
valid  for  the  Yatela  district,  which  may  differ  from  regional  structural  compilations 
reported  for  the  West  African  Craton.  The  trends  of  ore  shoots  were  evaluated  using 
Leapfrog® three-dimensional rendering of combined grade control and exploration drill 
hole assay data.  
4.2.  Petrography and mineral chemistry 
Fifty samples were collected from diamond drill core and directly in the Yatela 
open pit. The considered suite of samples included representative examples of country 
rocks, alteration facies of varying intensities, and ore. Forty-five polished thin sections 
were  prepared  at  the  University  of  Western  Australia  (UWA)  and  at  Vancouver 
Petrographics  Ltd.  These  were  studied  using  optical  microscopy  at  the  Centre  for 
Exploration  Targeting  in  Perth,  and  scanning  electron  microscopy  at  the  Centre  for 
Microscopy,  Characterisation  and  Analysis  at  UWA.  Backscattered  electron  (BSE) 
imaging  and  mineral  chemistry  analyses  were  obtained  using  a  Tescan  Vega3  XM 
(SEM)  equipped  with  an  Oxford  instrument  X-ACT  energy  dispersive  detector  (EDS) 
and a JEOL JXA-8530F Hyperprobe fitted with 5 wavelength-dispersive spectrometers 
(WDS).  Quantitative  microanalyses  were  performed  using  proprietary  standards.  The 
analytical  software  used  to  collect  semi-quantitative  microanalyses  was  the  Oxford 
139

--- Page 158 ---
Instruments®  INCA  analytical  suite  on  Tescan  Vega  3.  Operating  parameters  for  the 
SEM-EDS included an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, a working distance of 15 mm, a 
beam  current  of  1.5  nA  and  a  detector  process  time  of  4  s.  Operating  conditions  for 
WDS  analysis  were  an  accelerating  voltage  of  15  kV,  a  beam  current  of  20  nA  and  a 
counting  time  of  20  s  on  peak  for  tourmalines.  Mean  atomic  number  background  and 
ZAF (i.e. atomic number absorption fluorescence) corrections were performed using the 
Armstrong (1988) algorithm. Yatela open pit geology 
4.3.  Host rocks 
The Yatela lithostratigraphy, as exposed in the open pit, consists of calcitic and 
dolomitic  marbles  overlain  by  detrital  metasedimentary  rocks  (Fig.  3).  Marbles  are 
generally pure but a distinct lithofacies occurs locally and is characterised by thin (0.2 – 
2  cm)  argillaceous-silty  horizons.  Detrital  metasedimentary  rocks  are  exposed  on  the 
western  pit  walls  and  consist  of  alternating  sequences  of  feldspathic  wacke,  arkosic 
arenite,  siltstone,  and  shale.  Well-preserved  way-up  indicators  such  as  fining-upwards 
sequences  in  wackes  and  rare  cross  bedding  in  arenite  indicate  upright  beds  with  a 
younging  direction  to  the  west.  The  marbles  and  detrital  metasedimentary  rocks  have 
been  intruded  by  a  diorite  stock  in  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  pit  (Fig.  3).  The 
intrusive  rock  is  dark  greenish-grey  and  medium-grained  in  hand  specimen.  It  has  a 
phaneritic  equigranular  texture  but  is  locally  amphibole-phyric.  Under  the  optical 
microscope,  the  least-altered  rock  specimens  are  largely  composed  of  plagioclase 
feldspars (>80% modal vol.), which exhibit characteristic polysynthetic twinning (albite 
and rare pericline). Plagioclase feldspars are euhedral prismatic, fine-grained (<2mm in 
size) and are variably altered to carbonate, muscovite, clay and other very fine-grained 
products.  Primary  magmatic  hornblende  generally  occurs  as  a  minor  phase  (<10% 
modal vol.). Quartz is an accessory phase and occurs in interstitial space (<5% modal 
vol.).  The  emplacement  of  the  Yatela  diorite  resulted  in  the  development  of  a  high 
temperature-low pressure hornblende-hornfels contact aureole. Marbles adjacent to the 
contact  margin  (0-20  m)  exhibit  porphyroblastic  tremolite-actinolite  and  scapolites 
minerals.  
140

--- Page 159 ---
Figure 3. Geological map of the Yatela open pit. Structural data recorded during field mapping is 
presented as equal area stereonets using the lower hemisphere convention.  
141

--- Page 160 ---
4.4.  Structural framework 
The  earliest  structural  component  consists  of  a  strong  NW-trending  steeply 
west-dipping planar fabric (S1), which sub-parallels the main orientation of bedding (S0) 
in  the  open  pit  (Fig.  3,  Fig.  4A).  That  planar  fabric  is  ubiquitous  in  the  detrital 
sedimentary  rocks  on  the  western  pit  walls.  Numerous  parasitic  folds  associated  with 
that fabric have fold axes (F1A) and intersection lineations (L1) plunging gently to the 
NW. Barren quartz veins (V1) are locally dismembered and boudinaged along S1 (Fig. 
4B). A second folding episode has been recorded in the two KW18 ancillary pits 1.5 km 
west of the Yatela deposit (see Fig. 2 for location) and is correlated with the formation 
of disharmonic, inclined to upright folds (F2). Fold axes plunge gently (10-30°) to the 
NNE and are associated with 015°/80E axial-planar cleavage (S2). Interference patterns 
associated  with  the  refolding  of  the  early  folds  (F1)  by  the  F2  folds  were  observed 
locally.  The  Yatela  diorite  crosscut  S1,  however,  the  timing  of  its  emplacement  with 
respect to the development of S2 remains unclear due to the absence of clear structural 
relationships.  Numerous  steep  ENE-trending  quartz  veins  (V2)  have  been  observed  in 
the open pit (Fig. 3, Fig. 4C). These veins crosscut S1 and S2, range from 5 cm to 30 cm 
in width, and host accessory pyrite. A number of NNW-trending (325°/50°NE) to NNE-
trending (010°/85°E) to faults have been mapped throughout the open pit (Fig. 3, Fig. 
4C-D). These faults are preferentially developed within marbles and diorite and crosscut 
all  earlier  structural  elements  including  the  S1  and  S2  planar  fabrics.  Kinematic 
indicators  such  as  slickenfibres  on  fault  walls  and  V2  quartz  veins  offset  indicate 
sinistral displacement. A steep NNE-trending fault developed along the diorite-marble 
interface  and  is  correlated  with  zones  (up  to  2-m-wide)  of  hydrothermal-tectonic 
breccias.  This  NNE-trending  fault,  however,  displays  no  reliable  kinematic  indicators 
due  to  the  extensive  weathering  of  the  rocks.  The  ENE-trending  sub-vertical  faults 
crosscut  the  NNW-trending  fault  array  and  are  associated  with  chlorite  slickenfibres 
indicating  dextral  displacement  (Fig.  3,  Fig.  4E).  The  latest  structural  component 
recognised in the field is associated with WNW-trending sub-vertical faults. Kinematic 
indicators  such  as  drags  on  fault  blocks  indicate  normal  displacement  (Fig.  3,  4F). 
These faults crosscut all Birimian host rocks and previously described structures. Some 
of these late WNW-trending faults exhibit fault breccia (2-5-cm-wide) filled with iron-
142

--- Page 161 ---
stained sandy material (Fig. 4G). Two of these faults bound the main karst cavity at the 
Yatela open pit.  
143

--- Page 162 ---
Figure  4.  A)  Field  photograph  illustrating  the  penetrative  S1  planar  fabric  recorded  in 
metasedimentary rocks. Note the S-shaped asymmetry of the parasitic folds. B) Field photograph 
showing an early barren quartz vein (V1) boudinaged and dismembered along S1 in metasiltstones. 
C) Field photograph showing an ENE-trending steep quartz vein (V2) cut and sinistrally offset by a 
steep NNW-trending fault. D) Panoramic view of Yatela open pit walls looking to the NNW. Note 
the deep weathering features along the steep NNW-trending fault array. E) Slickenfibres on a sub-
vertical ENE-trending fault wall indicate dextral kinematics. Black arrow indicates displacement of 
the  missing block.  F)  Typical  view  of a  late  brittle  cross-fault associated  with  an  inferred  normal 
displacement. G) Close-up view of an open breccia associated with the late normal cross-faults. 
4.5.  Primary gold distribution  
 The  bulk  of  the  primary  gold  mineralisation  occurs  in  two  settings:  (1)  in  the 
wall-rocks of the NNW-trending fault array and, (2) along the faulted contact between 
the  diorite  and  marble  (Fig.  5A-C).  Geochemical  and  petrographic  analysis  of  the  V1 
and  V2  quartz  veins  indicates  they  are  barren.  Mineralised  zones  are  associated  with 
disseminated  sulphides  and  pyrite  stringers  in  wall-rocks,  quartz-carbonate  stockwork 
veins, and breccias. Ore minerals are quite diverse but their volumetric proportions are 
typically  low  in  each  rock  type  (ca.  0.5–3  %  sulphides).  Sulphide-rich  zones  in  wall 
rocks  and/or  in  vein  are  commonly  associated  with  gold  grades  ranging  from  1-2  g/t. 
The  best-mineralised  deep  drill  hole  intersect  observed  was  9m  @  2.12  g/t  (weighted 
average)  and  correlated  with  the  faulted  contact  between  diorite  and  marble.  As  an 
empirical observation, fabrics displaying a greater degree of deformation are linked to 
higher sulphide and gold abundance. Gold grades along the NNW-trending fault array 
tend to decrease with increasing distance away from the main intrusive stock – marble 
interface (Fig. 5A-C).  
144

--- Page 163 ---
Figure  5.  A)  Leapfrog®  scene  illustrating  the  structural  controls  on  ore  shoot  geometry.  Assay 
values  from  combined  grade  control  and  exploration  drill  hole  data.  B)  Wireframe  of  the  diorite 
surface. C) The scene shows Au trends draped over the diorite surface.  
145

--- Page 164 ---
4.6.  Hydrothermal alteration 
A summary of the ore and alteration paragenesis at Yatela is presented in Figure 
6 and is explained in detail hereafter. A syn-tectonic hydrothermal alteration overprints 
early  hornblende-hornfels  contact-metamorphic  assemblages  in  host  rocks  and  is 
typically  defined  by  Fe-dolomite  +  quartz  +  biotite  ±  tourmaline,  muscovite,  albite, 
actinolite-tremolite.  Pyrite  and  a  wide  range  of  accessory  ore  minerals  are  texturally 
associated  with  this  hydrothermal  alteration  phase.  Fault  breccias  in  marble  typically 
exhibit silicified angular clasts and pyrite stringers (Fig. 7A). Pyrite in these breccias is 
present in clasts and in the finer-grained comminuted matrix, suggesting a syn-tectonic 
timing  of  formation  (Fig.  7B).  Rare  examples  of  stylolitic-shaped  pyrite  veinlets  have 
been observed in drill core (Fig. 7C-D). Grey to milky white quartz-dolomite stockwork 
veins  are  common  in  diorite  (Fig.  7E-F).  These  veins  typically  contain  euhedral  to 
subhedral pyrite crystals and are also associated with fine-grained pyrite disseminated in 
wall-rocks.  Rare  actinolite-tourmaline-pyrite  veins  are  also  recorded  in  diorite  (Fig. 
7G).  Biotite  typically  marks  the  shear  fabric  in  diorite  and  is  closely  associated  with 
pyrite  and  traces  of  tourmaline  (Fig.  7H).  Tourmaline  alteration  is  structurally-
controlled  and  occurs  in  trace  amounts  (up  to  2  %  modal  vol.)  in  vein  and/or 
disseminated in wall-rocks and breccias. Representative electron probe micro-analyses 
of hydrothermal tourmalines are presented in Appendix A. Micro-analyses indicate that 
the tourmalines at Yatela belong to the alkali group and the schorl-dravite series, similar 
to those identified at the Sadiola Hill gold deposit and in the Loulo district (Fig. 8A-B). 
Syn-mineralisation  stage  tourmalines  at  Yatela  also  plot  along  the  oxydravite-
povondraite  compositional  trend  (meta-evaporite  tie  line  proposed  by  Henry  et  al., 
2008) (Fig. 8B).  
146

--- Page 165 ---
Figure  6.  Ore  and  alteration  paragenetic  sequence  chart  for  Yatela  primary  gold  mineralisation. 
The  ore-related  phases  correspond  to  both  the  veining  style  and  disseminated  style  of 
mineralisation (both styles formed contemporaneously). Accessory mineral formulas: berthierite = 
FeSb2S4; tetrahedrite = (Cu,Fe)12Sb4S13; tennantite = (Cu,Fe)12As4S13; stibnite = Sb2S3; cobaltite = 
CoAsS; pentlandite = (Fe,Ni)9S8; gersdorffite = NiAsS.  
147

--- Page 166 ---
Figure 7. A) Faulted breccia after marble in drill core. B) Fault breccia after marble in thin section. 
Pyrite  occurs  in  clasts  and  in  the  finer-grained  comminuted  matrix  between  angular  clasts  of 
silicified  marble.  C) Drill  core  photograph  showing  a  sylolitic-shaped  pyrite veinlet  in  marble.  D) 
Representative  micrograph  of  the  stylolitic-shaped  pyrite  veinlet.  Note  the  finer-grained  pyrite 
disseminated  in  wall-rocks.  E-F)  White  quartz-dolomite  stockwork  veins  in  diorite.  These  veins 
occur  in  wall-rocks  along  the  fault  arrays  and  typically  contain  euhedral  to  subhedral  pyrite 
crystals.  G)  Representative  micrograph  of  an  actinolite-tourmaline-pyrite  vein  in  diorite.  H) 
Micrograph showing micro-fractures marked by biotite and pyrite in diorite.  
148

--- Page 167 ---
Figure  8.  Representative  chemical  composition  of  Yatela  syn-mineralisation  stage  hydrothermal 
tourmalines.  Micro-analyses  were  undertaken  using  an  electron  probe  and  the  stoichiometry  was 
calculated using the Winclastour software (Yavuz et al., 2006). Ternary plots show the classification 
of  hydrothermal  tourmaline  at  Yatela.  Light  shaded  areas  show  the  composition  of  multistage 
hydrothermal tourmaline from the Loulo deposits (Yalea North, Gara, P-129, P-64 and Gounkoto; 
data  from  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  Darker  shaded  areas  show  the  composition  of  hydrothermal 
tourmaline  from  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  (data  from  Masurel  et  al.,  in  press).  A)  Classification 
based on the X-site occupancy, using the Ca - X-site vacancy - Na + (K) diagram of Hawthorne and 
Henry  (1999).  B)  Classification  based  on  Y-  and  Z-site  occupancy,  using  the  Al-Fe-Mg  ternary 
diagram of Henry and Guidotti (1985). Labelled fields: 1. Li-rich granitoid pegmatites and aplites. 
2.  Li-poor  granitoids  pegmatites  and  aplites.  3.  Fe3+-rich  quartz-tourmaline  rocks  (altered 
granitoids).  4.  Metapelites  and  metapsammites  with  Al-saturating  phase.  5.  Metapelites  and 
metapsammites  lacking  Al-saturating  phase.  6.  Fe3+-rich  quartz-tourmaline  rocks,  calc-silicate 
rocks and metapelites. 7. Low Ca meta-ultramafic rocks and Cr-V-rich metasedimentary rocks. 8. 
Metacarbonates and metapyroxenites. Meta-evaporite tie line after Henry et al. (2008).  
149

--- Page 168 ---
4.7.  Primary ore mineralogy 
The primary mineralisation is pyrite-rich, contains abundant chalcopyrite, minor 
arsenopyrite,  and  accessory  Zn-Pb-Sb-Ag-Co-Ni-Fe-bearing  mineral  species.  Pyrite  is 
the  dominant  sulphide  phase  at  Yatela  and  largely  occurs  in  two  forms  that  include 
single euhedral to subhedral crystals and crystal aggregates (Fig. 9A). Chalcopyrite and 
arsenopyrite  are  also  common  ore  phases.  Chalcopyrite  occurs  as  subhedral  crystals 
enclosed in pyrite, crystals intergrown with pyrite, interstitial space infill between pyrite 
crystals,  infill  of  micro-fractures  in  pyrite,  crystals  mantling  pyrite  faces,  and  as 
overgrowths  on  pyrite  (Fig.  9B).  Arsenopyrite  occurs  as  fine-grained  acicular  to 
prismatic  crystals  and  aggregates,  enclosed  in  pyrite,  and  intergrown  with  pyrite. 
Accessory  pyrrhotite  occurs  as  euhedral  inclusion  in  pyrite  and  single  crystals  closely 
associated with pyrite-chalcopyrite. Traces of needle-shaped molybdenite and subhedral 
berthierite  are  present  as  fine-grained  inclusions  in  pyrite  and  traces  of  subhedral 
sphalerite  occur  intergrown  with  tetrahedrite-tennantite  minerals  (Fig.  9C).  Accessory 
galena occurs as infill in pyrite micro-fractures, rarely associated with tetrahedrite and 
chalcopyrite  (Fig.  9D).  Traces  of  stibnite  are  present  as  overgrowths  on  pyrite. 
Accessory cobaltite and pentlandite are also present in the ore; they were consistently 
deposited late in the paragenesis.  
Native gold particles are present in the ore. Gold is associated with a low silver content 
(<10 wt. %) and deposited as (1) subhedral to anhedral inclusions and blebs (1-10 µm) 
within pyrite (Fig. 9E) (G-I); (2) individual particles (5-20 µm) located on pyrite crystal 
edges (G-II) (Fig. 9F); and rarely as (3) free disseminated anhedral gold particles (2-15 
µm) closely associated with pyrite (G-III).  
150

--- Page 169 ---
Figure  9.  BSE  images  of  ore-related  phases  at  Yatela.  A)  Minor  arsenopyrite  is  enclosed  and/or 
mantled  by  pyrite.  B)  Chalcopyrite  is  enclosed  by  and  intergrown  with  pyrite.  C)  Traces  of  base 
metal  sulphides  consistently  occur  late  in  the  paragenesis.  D)  Galena  occurring  as  infill  in  pyrite 
micro-fractures.  E)  Minute  gold  bleb  (~2  µm)  enclosed  in  pyrite  (G-I).  F)  Gold  particle  (~20  µm) 
located on pyrite crystal edge (G-II). 
151

--- Page 170 ---
4.8.  Karst infill stratigraphy 
Post-Birimian  karstification  and  the  development  of  a  deep  weathering  profile 
have  modified  the  original  lithostratigraphy  in  the  Yatela  deposit  area.  The  dominant 
geological  feature  at  Yatela  is  the  presence  of  a  complex  surficial  karst  topography 
characterised by coalescing troughs that are infilled by unconsolidated sandy material. 
The  vertically-extensive  trough  in  the  southern  part  of  the  open  pit  is  220  m  deep. 
Drilling  and  satellite  pits  targeting  oxide  ore  have  allowed  this  buried  karstic 
topography  to  be  traced  northwards  up  to  the  Neoproterozoic  sandstone  escarpment 
where it thins out. The karst infill shows a simple stratigraphy as follows (Fig. 10): 
The  basal  layer  of  the  karst  cavity  infill  comprises  the  auriferous  residuum  (i.e. 
saprolite-hosted gold-enriched dissolution residue). It consists of a mixture of insoluble 
fragments  of  underlying  bedrock,  blocks  and  pebbles  (approx.  1  cm  to  20  cm)  of 
saprock after the Seroukoto sandstone, quartz fragments and pebbles (approx. 2 mm up 
to 10 cm), residual dolomitic marble fragments, and gossanous fragments derived from 
the  primary  mineralisation,  which  are  set  into  a  clay-rich  ferruginous  matrix  (Fig.  10, 
Fig. 11A-B).  
The blocky sand unit overlies the residuum (Fig. 10, Fig. 11C-E). The contact between 
the  residuum  and  the  blocky  sand  unit  occurs  over  less  than  a  metre  and  is  laterally 
irregular. The blocky sand unit consists of weathered angular blocks (up to several tens 
of metres wide) of the Seroukoto sandstone supported in a coarse-grained (approx. 0.5-2 
mm), silica-rich, sandy matrix. Numerous 2-50-m-long sandstone blocks exposed on the 
pit walls dip at variable angles towards the depocentre. In some parts of the open pit, the 
blocky  sand  unit  entirely  consists  of  an  accumulation  of  Seroukoto-derived  sandstone 
blocks. The individual block surfaces locally exhibit slickenfibres suggestive of down-
karst slumping and block rotation.  
The blocky sand unit shares a gradational contact with a fine sand unit, which consists 
of  fine-grained  (approx.  125-250  µm),  silica-rich,  unconsolidated  sands  (Fig.  10,  Fig. 
11D).  Bedding  in  the  fine  sand  unit  is  defined  by  layers  of  transported  laterite  (i.e. 
duricrust  and  pisolitic  gravel)  of  varying  thickness  (from  a  few  10’s  of  cm  to  several 
metres) (Fig. 10, Fig. 11D). The transported laterite layers show relatively flat bedding 
at the top of the infill but gradually steepen with depth. This suggests active dissolution 
152

--- Page 171 ---
and  sagging  during  infill.  Pisolitic  layers  exhibit  sag-induced  growth  faults  and  sand 
dykes (i.e. extensional cracks filled with sand). A 10-15 m thick alluvial unit (complex 
cycles of alluvial infill) unconformably overlies the blocky and fine sand units, capping 
the  karst  infill  succession  (Fig.  10,  Fig.  11E).  Each  cycle  is  erosive  on  the  other  and 
fines upwards from basal gravels consisting of pisoliths, angular fragments of duricrust 
and Seroukoto sandstone, to finer silica-rich sands.    
Figure  10.  Schematic  geological  cross-section  through  the  Yatela  deposit  showing  idealised  karst 
infill stratigraphy (modified from Hanssen et al., 2004). 
153

--- Page 172 ---
Figure  11.  Representative  field  photographs  of  the  karst  infill  stratigraphy.  A)  Pendants  of 
auriferous  residuum  draped  over  the  irregular  karst  topography.  B)  Typical  view  of  the  gold-
enriched,  polymict,  ferruginous  dissolution  residue.  C)  Typical  view  of  the  blocky  sand  unit. 
Sandstone  boulders  of  variable  size  float  within  a  sandy  matrix.  Each  bench  is  5m  high.  D) 
Panoramic view of the karst infill stratigraphy showing clear sagging of the fine sand unit towards 
the  depocentre.  The  hill  immediately  northeast  of  the  open  pit  consists  of  Neo-proterozoic 
sandstone cover. E) Panoramic view of the karst infill unconformably overlain by complex cycles of 
alluvial material. 
154

--- Page 173 ---
4.9.  Secondary gold distribution  
There  is  a  spatial  relationship  between  the  NNW-trending  faults  in  carbonate 
near  the  Yatela  diorite,  the  location  of  hydrothermal  alteration  and  primary 
mineralisation,  and  the  location  of  auriferous  residuum  (Fig.  12A).  In  contrast,  the 
ENE-trending  and  WNW-trending  sub-vertical  fault  sets  do  not  appear  as  dominant 
controls on development of the auriferous residuum. The steep WNW-trending normal 
faults, however, bound the main karst cavity in the Yatela open pit and may have played 
a  significant  role  in  the  deposition  of  the  blocky  sand  and  fine  sand  units  (Fig.  12B). 
The sharp increase in thickness of the blocky and fine sand units in the central part of 
the  depocentre  does  not  correlate  with  an  increase  in  thickness  of  the  residuum  (Fig. 
12C-D).  This  suggests  that  the  structural  controls  on  location  of  the  primary 
mineralisation and auriferous residuum were distinct from those that controlled infill of 
the depocentre by silica-rich sands (i.e. blocky and fine sand units).  
Figure 12. A) Leapfrog® scene illustrating the wireframe of the auriferous residuum. B) The scene 
shows  the  modelled  base  of  the  blocky  sand  unit.  C)  Longitudinal  section  illustrating  the  blocky-
fine sand infill wireframe. D) Longitudinal section illustrating the auriferous residuum and blocky-
fine sand infill wireframes. Note that the increase in thickness of the blocky-fine sand infill does not 
correlate with an increase in thickness of the auriferous residuum.  
155

--- Page 174 ---
5. Discussion 
5.1. 
Integration with regional geology and tectonics 
At least two phases of folding have affected the country rocks in the Yatela area. 
The  pervasive  steep  NW-trending  cleavage  (S1)  and  associated  lineation  data  are 
consistent with NE-SW directed shortening (D1y). This deformation event is correlated 
with  the  folding  and  thrusting  of  the  lithostratigraphic  units  in  the  region.  This  early 
event (D1y) has been similarly reported in the Mako volcanic belt where it is correlated 
with  stratigraphic  stacking  and  the  formation  of  a  NNW-trending  planar  fabric  (D1  in 
Diene et al., 2012; Gueye et al., 2008). The development of NNE-trending upright folds 
(F2)  and  penetrative  axial-planar  cleavage  (S2)  is  cryptic  at  Yatela  but  represents  the 
dominant structural feature 1.5 km west in the KW18 ancillary pits and 25 km south at 
the world-class Sadiola Hill gold deposit. Fold geometry and lineation data associated 
with  the  second  deformation  event  (D2y)  are  consistent  with  NW-SE  directed 
shortening.  The  D2y  event  is  compatible  with  a  period  of  fold-and-thrust  tectonics 
responsible  for  the  region-wide  structural  grain  (D2)  (in  Ivory  Coast,  Pouclet  et  al., 
2006;  Vidal  et  al.,  2009;  in  Burkina  Faso,  Hein,  2010;  in  Guinea,  Lahondère  et  al., 
2002;  in  Mali,  Liégeois  et  al.,  1991;  Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010; 
McFarlane et al., 2011; Diene et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2013a; in Senegal, Treloar et 
al.,  2014).  Calc-alkaline  magmatic  suites  intruded  the  Birimian  volcano-sedimentary 
pile  at  ca.  2100  Ma  in  the  KKI  (Ndiaye  et  al.,  1997;  Pawlig  et  al.,  2006;  Dioh  et  al., 
2006). The Yatela diorite was emplaced during D2y and has been dated at 2106 ± 10 Ma 
by  Hein  et  al.  (in  press).  The  development  of  the  ENE-trending  steep  vein  set  is 
interpreted  to  represent  a  post-D2y,  short-lived  and  local  episode  of  extension  as  no 
regional correlations could be made. The geometry of the NNW-trending fault array and 
NNE-trending fault at the diorite-marble interface, and associated kinematic indicators 
are consistent NW-SE directed shortening (D3y). At the regional scale, D3y is compatible 
with  a  period  of  transcurrent  tectonics  (D3)  coeval  with  voluminous  calc-alkaline 
magmatism (in southern Mali, Milési et al., 1992; Olson et al., 1992; McFarlane et al., 
2011; in eastern Guinea, Egal et al., 2002; in southern Ghana, Feybesse et al., 2006; in 
western Burkina Faso, Baratoux et al., 2011). The two local deformation phases D2y and 
156

--- Page 175 ---
D3y documented at Yatela relate to the evolution of a regional system accommodating 
oblique convergence during the Eburnean orogeny (ca. 2115-2060 Ma). The steep ENE-
trending  sub-vertical  faults  recorded  at  Yatela  crosscut  the  ore-hosting  structures  and 
hence  post-date  the  primary  mineralisation.  Fault  geometry  and  associated  dextral 
kinematic indicators are consistent with E-W oriented shortening (D4y). At the regional 
scale, this D4y deformation phase could correlate with the very late Eburnean (ca. 2060-
2050 Ma) dextral reactivation described by Dabo and Aïfa (2011) in the Falémé region. 
The  last  local  deformation  event  (D5y)  is  correlated  with  the  formation  of  sub-vertical 
WNW-trending normal faults. These structures cut across all pre-existing structures and 
post-date  primary  mineralisation.  These  faults  are  interpreted  to  have  formed  post-
deposition of the Neoproterozoic Seroukoto sandstone and acted as a major control on 
infill of the karst cavity.  
5.2.  Towards a genetic model  
In  what  follows  we  propose  an  ore  genetic  model  integrating  the  formation  of 
the primary gold mineralisation with subsequent processes leading to the formation of 
the gold resource (i.e. auriferous residuum). 
The  primary  gold  mineralisation  occurred  during  D3y  based  on  field  relationships  and 
micro-textural observations. The equivalent structural setting and relative timing of gold 
between Yatela and other world-class gold deposits in the KKI (e.g., Loulo, Lawrence 
et  al.,  2013a;  Massawa,  Treloar  et  al.,  2014;  Sadiola  Hill,  Masurel  et  al.,  in  press) 
suggests that region-wide gold mineralisation occurred  during a  period  of  transcurrent 
tectonics, after the cessation of regional-scale compressional deformation. Although not 
diagnostic  of  a  specific  fluid  source,  the  chemical  composition  of  syn-mineralisation 
hydrothermal tourmalines at Yatela is also consistent with that reported for Sadiola Hill 
(Masurel et al., in press) and for the Loulo-Bambadji  district (Lawrence  et al., 2013a; 
Lambert-Smith,  2014).  At  the  district  scale,  the  primary  ore  paragenesis  at  Yatela  is 
compatible with the Au-As-Sb ± Cu-Ag-W-Mo-Bi-Zn-Pb-Te metal signature identified 
at  Sadiola  Hill  (Masurel  et  al.,  in  press).  The  presence  of  pyrite  as  principal  sulphide 
phase  at  Yatela,  however,  is  interpreted  to  reflect  a  host-rock  dependency,  and/or  a 
spatial  zoning  of  metals  with  increasing  distance  from  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone, 
157

--- Page 176 ---
and/or  mineralisation  at  a  distinct  crustal  level.  Thus,  the  Yatela  gold  occurrence  is 
interpreted to have formed during a period of region-wide orogenic gold (e.g., Groves et 
al., 1998; McCuaig and Kerrich, 1998; Ridley and Diamond, 2000; Groves et al., 2003; 
Goldfarb et al., 2005) mineralisation in the late Eburnean, similarly to world-class and 
minor gold deposits in the KKI.  
The bulk of the resource at Yatela, however, is hosted in the auriferous residuum and is 
associated  with  irregular  (e.g.,  dendritic  to  wire-like  forms),  angular  secondary  gold 
grains (Hein et al., in press). Such morphology is interpreted to result from mobilisation 
(physical  and/or  chemical)  of  the  locally-sourced  primary  (hypogene)  gold  during  the 
creation  of  a  deep  weathering  profile  and  associated  karstification  processes  (e.g., 
Bowell  et  al.,  1996).  The  creation  of  a  deep  weathering  profile  was  initiated  in  the 
upper-Cretaceous  across  West  Africa  (e.g.,  Brown  et  al.,  1994;  Lavaud  et  al.,  2004). 
The surficial dissolution of the carbonate host rocks resulted in the creation of troughs 
that  were  draped  and  filled  with  a  ferruginous  dissolution  residue  locally  containing 
secondary gold (e.g., Hein et al., in press) and blocks of Neoproterozoic sandstone that 
are  likely  to  have  collapsed  into  the  Yatela  depocentre  because  karstification  started 
beneath  the  cover  sequences  (Fig.  13A-B).  The  term  residual  is  used  here  rather  than 
“in-situ”  because  the  formation  of  the  residuum  may  have  involved  minor  (5-50  m) 
lateral displacement as well as vertical collapse (e.g., Anand and Butt, 2010). Physical 
transport  of  gold  occurred  due  to  profile  reduction  (e.g.,  erosion,  karstification)  and 
creep  of  fine-grained  material,  whereas  chemical  mobilisation  occurred  due  to 
dissolution and reprecipitation of the gold by groundwater or near-surface waters (e.g., 
Williams-Jones  et  al.,  2009).  The  grade  of  the  auriferous  residuum  varied  locally 
depending  on  the  initial  gold  grade  carried  by  the  host  marble  and  the  abundance  of 
silty-argillaceous horizons in that carbonate rock volume. Progressive karstification and 
sagging  resulted  in  deposition  of  the  sandy  infill  material  (Fig.  13C).  Evidence  for 
sagging is cryptic at surface but abundant at depth. Individual pisolitic layers are locally 
buckled and affected by low-angle thrusts. Such deformation features are explained by 
the  competency  contrast  between  the  fine  sand  and  pisolitic  layers.  Minor  folding 
occurred in the deeper parts of the dissolution troughs. Within the cavity and along its 
walls,  a  set  of  syn-depositional  normal  faults  facilitated  sliding  of  the  infill  material 
downwards  towards  the  centre  of  dissolution.  The  presence  of  the  transported  laterite 
layers  is  also  important  because  lateritic  reworking  occurred  during  the  Paleocene  to 
158

--- Page 177 ---
Miocene in West Africa (Beauvais et al., 2008; Beauvais  and  Chardon, 2013). Lastly, 
the Yatela karst infill succession was capped by barren alluvial cover (Fig. 13D).  
The  presence  of  carbonate  host  rocks,  characteristics  of  the  primary  mineralisation, 
semi-arid climatic conditions, and weathering intensity were probably the major factors 
that determined residual and supergene gold enrichment at Yatela (e.g., Anand and Butt, 
2010).  The  Yatela-style  orebodies  represent  attractive  exploration  opportunities  as  the 
surficial  karst  cavities  are  deep  and  laterally  extensive.  The  Yatela-style  targets, 
however, represent an exploration challenge. Indeed, the detection of either primary or 
secondary  gold  mineralisation  using  conventional  geochemical  surveys  will  be  very 
limited  if  the  karst  cavity  is  covered  by  barren  material.  Moreover,  the  complex 
geometry of a residuum horizon and irregular karst topography require significant close-
spaced drilling for resource estimates. 
159

--- Page 178 ---
Figure  13.  Series  of  schematic  geological  cross-sections  illustrating  a  protracted  ore-forming 
process at Yatela. A) Unconformable deposition of Neoproterozoic sandstone cover sequences over 
Birimian  country  rocks.  The  country  rocks  host  a  low-grade,  primary  gold  mineralisation.  B) 
Surficial dissolution of marble host rocks results in the formation of troughs that are draped and 
filled  with  a  ferruginous  dissolution  residue  locally  enriched  in  gold.  Blocks  of  the  sandstone 
collapse into the Yatela depocentre because karstification started beneath the cover sequences. C) 
Progressive karstification results in sagging and infill of the troughs by the blocky sands and fine 
sands. The creation of a deep weathering profile results in residual and supergene gold enrichment. 
D) The Yatela karst infill succession is capped by complex cycles of alluvial material.  
160

--- Page 180 ---
Commonwealth Governments. Dr. Malcolm Roberts is acknowledged for his excellent 
help  with  the  electron  microprobe.  Dr.  James-Lambert  Smith  is  thanked  for  his 
comprehensive appraisal of the study and constructive reviews.

--- Page 181 ---
Chapter  V.  The  tectono-magmatic  evolution  of  the 
Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  West  Africa:  new  insights 
from 
igneous 
rock  geochemistry  and 
  U-Pb 
geochronology in the Sadiola-Yatela region 
Quentin Masurel1*, Nicolas Thébaud1, John Miller1, Stanislav Ulrich2 
1Centre for Exploration Targeting, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, 
WA, Australia. 
2AngloGold Ashanti Australia Limited, Asset Development - Brownfields, 44 St. Georges Terrace, Perth, 
WA, Australia. 
*Corresponding author, Ph: +61864885809, E-mail:  qmasurel@hotmail.com 
Keywords: Kédougou-Kénieba inlier; Sadiola; Eburnean orogeny; geochemistry; U-Pb 
geochronology.  
1. Abstract 
The  Paleoproterozoic  terranes  of  West  Africa  provide  a  complete  record  of 
crustal growth. The Kédougou-Kénieba inlier is the westernmost exposure of Birimian 
crust in the West African Craton and a world-class gold gold province. The bulk of the 
orogenic  gold  mineralisation  in  the  inlier  has  been  related  to  a  period  of  transcurrent 
tectonics coeval with calc-alkaline magmatism in the late Eburnean (ca. 2090 and 2070 
Ma). In this study, the geology, structural framework, geochemistry (n=28) and focused 
geochronology (n=13) of representative magmatic rocks from the Sadiola-Yatela region 
are  presented  and  integrated  with  published  data  in  order  to  provide  the  tectono-
magmatic framework to gold mineralisation in the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier.  
The  granitoids  from  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  display  a  temporal  evolution  from  ca. 
2150-2080  Ma  calc-alkaline  metaluminous  plutons  (e.g.,  diorite,  hornblende-
granodiorite)  to  ca.  2080-2060  Ma  peraluminous  high-K  granites  (e.g.,  biotite-
monzogranite).  The  least-evolved  rocks  are  associated  with  flat  REE  patterns  and 
171

--- Page 182 ---
correspond to plutons of the ca. 2140 Ma Finman complex and the ca. 2115 Ma Sadiola 
Hill quartz-feldspar-porphyry. In contrast, the vast majority of the Eburnean (ca. 2115-
2060 Ma) granitoids have a calc-alkaline affinity and are characterised by negative Nb-
Ta anomalies, marked Pb positive anomalies and high LIL/HFS ratios. These Eburnean 
magmatic  rocks  share  a  close  affinity  with  relatively  hydrous,  oxidised  magmas  and 
source  regions.  The  polycyclic  deformation  recorded  in  sedimentary  and  magmatic 
rocks of the region includes a period of early convergence (D1s), followed by a period of 
fold-and-thrust tectonics (D2s), and later transcurrent tectonics (D3s-D4s). The bulk of the 
gold  mineralisation  in  the  region  occured  during  D3s,  with  sinistral  displacement  and 
hydrothermal  fluid  circulation  along  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and  steep  NNE-
trending shear zones connected to structural traps in the Kofi basin. 
The  results  of  this  study,  when  integrated  with  published  data,  indicate  that  the  late 
Eburnean  tectono-thermal  event  between  2080  and  2060  Ma  represented  the 
geodynamic  engine  that  empowered  orogenic  gold  mineralisation  in  the  Kédougou-
Kénieba  inlier.  The  new  data  also  further  supports  the  hypothesis  that  the  Eburnean 
tectono-magmatic activity affected the Baoulé-Mossi domain diachronously from SE to 
NW.  
2. Introduction 
  Paleoproterozoic  supracrustal  and  intrusive  rocks  in  the  West  African  Craton 
mark a major episode of juvenile crust growth that lasted ~175 Ma from ca. 2.25 to 2.05 
Ga. The geology of the KKI consists of linear greenstone belts and wider sedimentary 
basins. Available geochronological data indicate that distinct peaks of magmatic activity 
occurred in the region from ca. 2200 Ma to 2070 Ma (e.g., Boher et al., 1992; Dia et al., 
1997; Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Pawlig et al., 2006; Dioh et al., 2006; Gueye et al., 2007, 
2008).  Intensive  studies  of  the  Eburnean  granitoids  have  focused  on  the  western  and 
southern parts of the KKI but limited data exist for the eastern part of the inlier, which 
hosts  the  world-class  Loulo  and  Sadiola-Yatela  gold  districts.  Hence,  the  study  of 
igneous  rocks  in  that  exceptionally  gold-endowed  region  appears  critical  not  only  to 
unravel  the  tectono-thermal  evolution  of  the  KKI  crust  but  also  in  terms  of  mineral 
system,  whereby  gold  deposits  are  viewed  as  local  expressions  of  orogen-  to 
172

--- Page 183 ---
lithospheric-scale  processes  (e.g.,  Bierlein  et  al.,  2006;  McCuaig  et  al.,  2010).  Recent 
research in the KKI has highlighted the spatial association between late Eburnean calc-
alkaline plutons and gold mineralisation (Lawrence et al., 2013a, b; Treloar et al., 2014; 
Lambert-Smith, 2014; Masurel et al., in press a, b). The potential role a complex fluid 
history  involving  metamorphic  and  magmatic  sources  has  been  proposed  in  the 
development  of  major  gold  deposits  (e.g.,  Loulo,  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a,b;  Massawa, 
Treloar  et  al.,  2014).  The  late  Eburnean  magmatic  activity  has  also  been  proposed  to 
have participated in the generation of thermal gradients, which produced regional fluid 
systems capable of transpoting gold (e.g., Masurel et al., in press a,.b). Regardless of the 
variability in gold mineralisation at the deposit-scale, the late Ebrunean tectono-thermal 
event  may  represent 
the  geodynamic  engine 
that  empowered  orogenic  gold 
mineralisation  in  the  KKI.  This  study  aims  at  (i)  documenting  the  petrographical-
geochemical  characteristics  and  absolute  timing  of  representative  igneous  rocks  in  the 
Sadiola-Yatela region and (ii) placing these rocks into a regional geological framework 
with respect to polycyclic deformation and gold mineralisation. These data will be used 
to discuss the tectono-magmatic evolution of the KKI and geodynamic implications.  
3. Geological setting of the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier 
  The  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier  (KKI)  is  the  westernmost  exposed  part  of  the 
Paleoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain in the West African Craton (inset Fig. 1). The 
inlier  is  bounded  on  its  western  margin  by  the  Hercynian  Mauritanides  (Villeneuve, 
2008). It is unconformably overlain by Neoproterozoic cover (i.e. Taoudeni sandstone) 
on all other sides (Villeneuve and Cornée, 1994). The KKI terrain is flat at an average 
elevation  of  125  m  above  the  sea  level.  The  region  is  characterized  by  a  thick 
subtropical weathering profile that has obscured much of the surface geology. The first-
order geological features that characterise the KKI are outlined below. 
173

--- Page 184 ---
3.1.  Magmatic activity 
  Several  geochronological  studies  have  been  carried  out  in  the  KKI.  Available 
geochronological  data  rely  on  several  analytical  methods  and  indicate  a  polycyclic 
magmatic activity that lasted from ca. 2200 to 2070 Ma (Table 1).  
The  oldest  peak  of  magmatic  activity  recorded  in  the  KKI  led  to  the  formation  of  the 
Mako  volcanic  belt,  the  Sandikounda  amphibolite-gneiss  plutonic  complex,  and  the 
Badon  granodiorite-granite  complex.  Rocks  of  the  Mako  Series  consist  of  juxtaposed 
tholeiitic  basalts  and  calc-alkaline  andesitic  lavas  intercalated  with  minor  immature 
sedimentary  rocks,  volcaniclastic  rocks,  and  pyroclastic  rocks  (Fig.  1)  (Bassot,  1987; 
Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Dioh et al., 2006; Gueye et al., 2008). Tholeiitic basalts in the 
Mako belt have been dated at ca. 2195 ± 11 Ma (Dia, 1988). The best crystallisation age 
estimates  for  emplacement  of  the  Sandikounda  amphibolite-gneiss  plutonic  complex 
and the Badon granodiorite fall within error at ca. 2200 Ma (Fig. 1) (Dia et al., 1997; 
Gueye  et  al.,  2007).  The  Sandikounda  amphibolite-gneiss  plutonic  complex  has  been 
interpreted to represent the deeper root of the Mako volcanic system (Dia et al., 1997). 
Altogether,  this  early  phase  of  magmatism  is  interpreted  to  reflect  the  initial  stage  of 
juvenile  crustal  growth  in  the  region  (ME-I)  (e.g.,  Pawlig  et  al.,  2006;  Gueye  et  al., 
2007).  
The second manifestation of magmatism (ME-II) was associated with the emplacement 
of  the  Sandikounda  layered  plutonic  complex,  which  intruded  rocks  of  the  Mako 
greenstone belt (Fig. 1). The layered plutonic complex is composed of Na-differentiated 
plutons  with  varying  composition  from  opx-gabbro  to  amphibole-biotite-bearing 
tonalite (Dioh et al., 2006). The best estimate for crystallisation of the layered plutonic 
complex is 2158 ± 8 Ma (Dia et al., 1997), which provides a minimum age for the Mako 
volcanic assemblage. 
The third peak of magmatic activity (ME-III) occurred between ca. 2140 and 2120 Ma 
and is associated with the intrusion of the Mako volcanic rocks by the Laminia-Kaourou 
plutonic  complex.  The  plutonic  complex  is  a  large  calc-alkaline  composite  pluton 
composed of granodiorite, tonalite and granite (Dia et al., 1997) (Fig. 1). The plutonic 
complex has been dated between 2138 ± 6 Ma and 2127 ± 6 Ma (Dia et al., 1997).  
174

--- Page 185 ---
The  fourth  peak  of  magmatic  activity  (ME-IV)  occurred  during  the  onset  of  the 
Eburnean  orogeny  between  ca.  2115  and  2090  Ma.  It  is  marked  by  the  intrusion  of 
numerous  basic  to  felsic  calc-alkaline  plutons  forming  circular  to  elliptic  bodies  of 
various sizes (e.g., Diombalou, Bouroumbourou) (Gueye et al., 2008) (Fig. 1). This time 
period also represents the best age estimate for the emplacement of pillowed andesitic 
flows  with  subordinate  rhyolitic  lavas  and  pyroclastites  in  the  Falémé  belt  (Fig.  1). 
Geochronological data acquired on a rhyolite flow provides a magmatic age of 2099 ± 4 
Ma (Hirdes and Davis, 2002).  
The  last  peak  of  magmatic  activity  (ME-V)  was  associated  with  the  massive 
emplacement of Eburnean granitoids in the KKI upper crust between ca. 2090 and 2070 
Ma (e.g., Dia et al., 1997; Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Gueye et al., 2007). These plutons 
vary in size (100’s of metres to 10’s of km) and define a wide compositional spectrum 
from metaluminous hornblende-biotite-bearing granodiorite (e.g., Mamakono, 2076 ± 3 
Ma, Hirdes and Davis, 2002) and pyroxene-bearing granodiorite-tonalite (e.g., Boboti, 
2080  ±  1  Ma,  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002)  to  peraluminous  monzogranites  (e.g.,  Saraya, 
2079 ± 2 Ma, Hirdes and Davis, 2002) (Fig. 1).  
175

--- Page 186 ---
176

--- Page 187 ---
Figure 1. Geologic map of the Kédougou-Kéniéba inlier (1:250,000 scale, modified after Gueye et 
al., 2007; Lawrence et al., 2013a). Inset map shows the geologic setting of the West African craton 
(modified after Boher et al., 1992). The Falémé River forms the international border with Senegal 
to the west and Mali to the east and north. Geochronological data after references given in Table 1. 
Abbreviations refer to plutons mentioned in the text: (Mako) Ma = Mamakono granodiorite, Ti = 
Tinkoto  granodiorite,  Dbl  =  Diombalou  granite,  Bbr  =  Bouroumbourou  granodiorite,  Ssk  = 
Sanssakhoto  monzogranite,  LKPC  =  Laminia-Kaourou  plutonic  complex,  SLPC  =  Sandikounda 
layered  plutonic  complex;  (Falémé)  Bal  =  Balangouma  tonalite,  Bo  =  Boboti  granodiorite,  SF  = 
South  Falémé  granodiorite,  DS  =  Dar  Salam  granodiorite,  Msl  =  Moussala  granodiorite,  Bbj  = 
Bambadji  granodiorite,  Bt  =  Boto  tonalite;  (Kofi)  Ga  =  Gamaye  monzogranite,  Yt  =  Yatea 
monzogranite, Al = Alamoutala granodiorite, Ya = Yatela diorite, Sek = Sekekoto granodiorite.  
3.2.  Sedimentary basins  
  The  Dialé-Daléma  and  Kofi  Series  represent  the  most  extensive  occurrence  of 
carbonates  rocks  in  the  West  African  Craton  (Bessoles,  1977;  Bosse,  1996). 
Sedimentary rocks of the Dialé-Daléma Series include volcaniclastics, arenites, wackes, 
siltstones,  argillites,  and  carbonates  with  minor  intercalations  of  andesite  flows  and 
felsic  pyroclastic  rocks  (Bassot,  1987;  Dia,  1988;  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002)  (Fig.  1). 
Sedimentary rocks of the Kofi Series consist of volcaniclastic rocks, wackes, arenites, 
impure carbonates, siltstones and argillites (Lawrence et al., 2013a) (Fig. 1). Hirdes and 
Davis  (2002)  proposed  that  the  transitional  field  relationships  between  sediments  and 
volcano-plutonic  rocks  in  the  KKI  imply  a  proximal  derivation  of  the  sediments  from 
eroded  rocks  in  neighbouring  volcano-plutonic  belts.  The  diachroneity  of  magmatic 
ages in the region is also reflected in the provenance of the sediments based on available 
detrital zircon data (Table 1). Tarkwian grabens and associated infill material have not 
yet been detected in the KKI. 
177

--- Page 188 ---
Table 1. Compilation of available geochronological data for the Kédougou-Kénieba inlier 
3.3.  Tectonics   
  Rocks  in  the  KKI  have  undergone  polycyclic  deformation.  A  summary  table 
presenting structural events reported for different regions of the KKI is given in Table 2. 
Most  authors  report  an  early  period  of  thrusting  tectonics  responsible  for  crustal 
thickening  (D1-  D2)  followed  by  a  period  of  transcurrent  tectonics  accommodating 
oblique convergence (D3-D4) (Diene et al., 2012). The early deformation episode (D1) 
was reported in the Mako belt where it is correlated with stratigraphic stacking and the 
formation of a NNW-trending planar fabric (Dabo and Aïfa, 2010, 2011; Gueye et al., 
2008; Diene et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2013a; Masurel et al., in press a, b, c). The 
elongated  geometry  of  the  Sandikounda  layered  plutonic  complex  (ME-II)  and  the 
178

--- Page 189 ---
Laminia-Kaourou  plutonic  complex  (ME-III),  together  with  local  textural  variations 
between  magmatic  and  solid-state  fabrics  indicate  syn-tectonic  timing  of  magma 
emplacement, which constrain the D1 event to have occurred between ca. 2160 Ma and 
2120 Ma (Gueye et al., 2008). The second (D2) and third (D3) deformation events were 
responsible  for  the  formation  of  map  scale  structures  and  massive  magmatic  addition 
(ME-IV,  ME-V).  These  two  deformation  events  mark  the  principal  imprint  of  the 
Eburnean orogeny, which occurred between ca. 2115 and 2075 Ma in the KKI (Hirdes 
and  Davis,  2002;  Gueye  et  al.,  2008).  Folding  during  D2  is  marked  by  a  locally 
penetrative  NNE-trending  cleavage  (Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010;  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a; 
Diene et al, 2012; Masurel et al., in press a). Fold and fault geometries, and kinematic 
indicators  are  consistent  with  progressive  NW-SE-directed  shortening.  The  following 
D3  event  is  associated  with  the  strike-slip  reactivation  of  early  accretionary  structures 
and  the  formation  of  steep  NNE-trending  sinistral  shear  zones  (Diene  et  al.,  2012; 
Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a;  Masurel  et  al.,  in  press  a,  b).  Fault  geometries  and  kinematic 
indicators  are  consistent  with  NNW-SSE-directed  shortening.  The  D2  and  D3  events 
documented  in  the  KKI  relate  to  the  evolution  of  a  regional  system  accommodating 
oblique  convergence  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (Masurel  et  al.,  in  press  a).  The 
Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and  the  Main  Transcurrent  Zone  are  interpreted  to  have 
formed during the onset of D2 as transpressional shear zones (Fig. 1) (Lawrence et al., 
2013a; Treloar et al., 2014). The D3 event has been correlated with hydrothermal fluid 
flow  and  gold  mineralisation  along  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and  the  Main 
Transcurrent Zone (Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar et al., 2014; Masurel et al., in press 
a, b, c). A last deformation event (D4) has been locally reported for the Loulo region and 
is  correlated  with  the  formation  of  NW-trending  z-shaped  folds  and  the  dextral 
reactivation of the N- to NNE-trending structural corridors (Dabo and Aïfa, 2011). This 
very  late  deformation  episode  occurred  between  ca.  2075  and  2050  Ma  under  E-W  to 
NE-SW-directed shortening (Dabo and Aïfa, 2011).  
179

--- Page 190 ---
Table  2.  Compilation  of  reported  tectonic  events  in  the  Mako  volcano-plutonic  belt  and  Loulo-
Falémé  region  of  the  KKI.  Abbreviations:  SMSZ,  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone;  MTZ,  Main 
Transcurrent Zone. 
180

--- Page 191 ---
3.4.  Metamorphism 
Regional  peak  metamorphism  occurred  under  regional  greenschist-facies 
conditions during the Eburnean orogeny (Debat et al., 1984; Liégeois et al., 1991; Dia et 
al.,  1997).  The  reported  greenschist-facies  assemblages  (e.g.,  biotite,  chlorite, 
muscovite,  quartz,  K-feldspar)  in  country  rocks  of  the  region  may  be  interpreted  as 
resulting  from  a  pervasive  retrogression  and  hydrothermal  overprint  of  older 
amphibolite-facies assemblages as proposed in southern Ghana by John et al. (1999). In 
contrast,  amphibolite-facies  conditions  have  been  observed  locally  in  contact  aureoles 
surrounding Eburnean granitoids (Debat et al., 1984; Pawlig et al., 2006; Masurel et al., 
in press). 
3.5.  Post-Birimian dolerite dykes 
Dolerite  dykes  are  abundant  across  the  West  African  craton  and  present  as 
magnetic  linear  features  due  to  their  remanent  magnetism  and  high  magnetic 
susceptibility  (Perrouty  et  al.,  2012).  Two  sets  of  dolerite  dyke  swarms  have  been 
reported  in  the  KKI  and  consistently  present  as  ENE-WSW  and  NE-SW-oriented 
lineaments.  Both  dyke  sets  crosscut  the  Paleoproterozoic  basement  and  show  no 
evidence  for  deformation  and  hydrothermal  alteration.  These  dolerite  swarms  can  be 
correlated  with  the  several  generations  of  Mesoproterozoic  to  Neoproterozoic  dolerite 
swarms  recorded  in  eastern  Senegal  and  dated  at  1500  Ma,  1300  Ma  and  1150  Ma 
(Kalsbeek et al., 2008; Perrouty et al., 2012).  
4. Methodology 
4.1.  Geological mapping and sampling 
  Geological mapping was conducted in the region with the help a rugged tablet 
integrating available geological and geophysical data-sets under ArcGIS. Face mapping 
was  conducted  on  accessible  ramps  of  the  open  pits  in  order  to  provide  a  robust 
structural framework for the Sadiola-Yatela region. All structural readings are given in 
181

--- Page 192 ---
true  north  coordinates.  Planar  features  were  reported  in  strike/dip/quadrant  and  linear 
data as plunge and azimuth. In this paper, the “s” subscript indicates that the considered 
structural  event  is  only  valid  for  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region,  which  may  differ  from 
regional structural compilations reported for the West African Craton.  
4.2.  Petrography and whole-rock geochemistry 
  Twenty-eight  least-altered  samples  of  representative  igneous  rocks  in  the 
Sadiola-Yatela region were obtained from outcrops, open pits, and diamond drill core. 
Approximately 1.5 kg of fresh, homogeneous rock was collected per sample. Rust stains 
were cleaned with abrasives and weathered surfaces were removed. Thin sections were 
prepared  from  rock  slabs  at  the  University  of  Western  Australia  and  studied  using 
optical  microscopy  at  the  Centre  for  Exploration  Targeting  in  Perth.  Igneous  rock 
classification followed IUGS systematics (Streckeisen, 1974) and was determined using 
hand specimen description as proxy to rock type and modal composition estimate in thin 
section. Rock samples were then crushed and chips were pulverized using low chrome-
steel  vessels.  Rock  powders  were  mixed  with  lithium  metaborate/tetraborate  and 
prepared  as  fusion  for  lithogeochemisty  package  LITH-205X  analysis  at  Intertek 
Genalysis Laboratories in Perth. Major elements were measured by XRF spectrometry. 
REE,  HFSE  and  trace  elements  (e.g.,  Ba,  Cr,  Cs,  Ga,  Rb,  Sc,  Sn,  Sr,  U,  V,  W)  were 
analyzed  by  inductively  coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry  (ICP-MS)  and  inductively 
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Other metals were analyzed 
by  the  same  techniques  but  prepared  with  multi-acid  digest  including  hydrofluoric, 
nitric, perchloric and hydrochloric acids in teflon tubes. Gold content was measured by 
fire-assay followed by ICP-MS. The Geological Survey of Western Australia Bunbury 
basalt  and  Kerba  granite  standards  were  analysed  during  each  session  to  monitor 
accuracy and instrument stability. The accuracy of the data was typically better than 3 
% for the major elements and trace elements were within 6 % of reference values. Raw 
geochemical data, achieved detection limits, and calculated petrogenetic indicators are 
listed  in  the  supplementary  material.  Geochemical  data  from  igneous  rocks  of  the 
Alamoutala open pit (n=2) are included for comparison (Masurel et al., in press b). The 
location of all samples is illustrated in Figure 2.  
182

--- Page 193 ---
4.3.  U-Pb geochronology 
  Focused  U-Pb  geochronology  data  was  collected  from  selected  igneous  rock 
specimens (n=13). Approximately 5 kg of material was collected for each rock sample. 
After  cleaning  and  removal  of  weathered  surfaces,  the  rock  sample  was  processed  at 
Geotrack  Pty.  Ltd.  in  Australia.  The  sample  was  crushed  using  a  mechanical  jaw 
crusher; powdered using a ring mill; and heavy minerals separated using standard heavy 
liquids  and  magnetic  procedures.  Target  zircons  were  handpicked  from  zircon 
concentrates  under  a  binocular  microscope  and  mounted  in  25  mm  epoxy-resin  discs 
with chips of U/Pb zircon standard M257 (561.3 Ma, 840 ppm U; Nasdala et al., 2008) 
or BR266 (559 Ma, 903 ppm U; Stern, 2001), crystals of reference zircons OGC1 (3465 
Ma; Stern et al., 2009) and silicate glass NBS610 at the Minsep Laboratories in Western 
Australia.  Cathodoluminescence  and  backscattered  electron  imaging  on  gold-coated 
mounts  were  performed  using  a  Tescan  Vega-3  scanned  electron  microscope  at  the 
Centre  for  Microscopy,  Characterization  and  Analysis  of  the  University  of  Western 
Australia  in  Perth.  U–Pb  analyses  were  performed  using  the  sensitive  high-resolution 
ion  microprobe  (SHRIMP  II)  at  the  John  de  Laeter  Centre  of  Excellence  for  Mass 
Spectrometry of Curtin University in Perth. Geochronological data was collected using 
standard operating procedures similar to those described by Compston et al. (1984) and 
Wingate and Kirkland (2013). Operating parameters include a 10 keV primary O2- beam 
focussed to a ~20 µm diameter spot, a net primary ion current between 1.6 and 3.0 nA 
and a secondary ion analyser set to a mass of ≥ 5000. Six data collection cycles (scans) 
were performed per analysis, and count times (per scan) were 10 s for the 204Pb, 206Pb, 
and  208Pb  mass  peaks  and  background,  and  30  s  for  the  207Pb  mass  peak.  Analyses  of 
unknowns  were  referenced  to  multiple  analyses  of  the  primary  and  external  standards 
for  U/Pb  calibration.  Calibration  and  reproducibility  uncertainties  are  included  in  the 
errors  of  238U/206Pb  ratios  and  age  data.  Data  reduction  was  carried  out  using  the 
software SQUID v2.5 and ISOPLOT v3.0 (MS Excel add-ins by Ludwig, 2003, 2009). 
Corrections for common Pb were based on measured 204Pb, assuming an average crustal 
composition  appropriate  to  the  age  of  the  mineral  (Stacey  and  Kramers,  1975). 
Analytical  cut-offs  were  used  in  order  to  minimise  the  risk  of  including  zircons  with 
potentially  disturbed  U-Pb  systematics  during  data  interpretation.  The  reported  U-Pb 
183

--- Page 194 ---
ages were derived from concordant to near-concordant grains (discordance between -3% 
and +10%). In addition, analyses that comprised more than 1% of non-radiogenic 206Pb 
and  yielded  U  concentrations  over  a  1000  ppm  were  rejected.  All  age  estimates  are 
reported  at  2σ  error  and  include  propagated  uncertainties  in  the  standard  calibrations. 
Raw geochronological data is provided in the supplementary material  
5. Results 
5.1.  Lithostratigraphy 
  The local geology presented hereafter is based on the recent field investigation 
by  the  authors  and  is  illustrated  in  Figure  2.  The  geology  of  the  Kofi  basin  in  the 
Sadiola-Yatela region consists of carbonate and detrital sedimentary rocks that exhibit 
KFMASH assemblages (e.g., biotite, chlorite, muscovite, quartz, K-feldspar) indicative 
of  regional  greenschist-facies  metamorphic  conditions.  For  the  purpose  of  clarity,  the 
prefix  “meta”  will  be  omitted  in  the  following  section.  Carbonate  rocks  consist  of 
impure  limestones  in  the  Sadiola  Hill  deposit  area  and  are  characterised  by  abundant 
thin  (0.2-2  cm)  argillaceous-silty  interbeds.  Carbonate  rocks  elsewhere  in  the  region 
consist  of  limestones  locally  interlayered  with  dolomitic  horizons.  Meso-scale 
disharmonic slump folds were mapped in carbonate rocks at the Sadiola Hill and FE3 
open pits. The overlying detrital sedimentary rock sequences exhibit way-up indicators 
such  as  fining-upwards  sequences,  scour-and-fill  structures,  and  rare  cross-bedding  in 
sandstone, which altogether indicate a younging to the West. These detrital sedimentary 
rocks consist of feldspathic wackes and arkosic arenites with subordinate rhyolite flows 
and pyroclastic rocks to the west, progressing to siltstones and argillites further east. A 
linear  to  arcuate  volcano-sedimentary  belt  to  the  west  consists  of  calc-alkaline 
porphyritic  andesites  and  volcaniclastic  rocks  interbedded  with  wackes,  arenites,  and 
siltstones.  The  boundary  between  rocks  of  the  Kofi  Series  and  rocks  of  the  volcano-
sedimentary belt is transitional.  
184

--- Page 195 ---
Figure  2.  Geology  of  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  based  on  field  investigation  by  the  authors  and 
interpretation of SEMOS geophysical data sets. 
185

--- Page 196 ---
5.2.  Structural framework 
The  Sadiola  Hill,  Yatela,  and  ancillary  pits  share  a  similar  tectonic  evolution 
(Fig. 2, 3). The data presented hereafter integrates extensive data collected in the open 
pits with data collected from surface outcrop mapping.  
The earliest structural component (D1s) recorded in the region consists of NNW- to N-
trending  folds.  These  folds  are  associated  with  a  weak  to  strong  axial-planar  cleavage 
(S1)  and  a  gently  NNW-plunging  intersection  lineation  (L1)  (Fig.  3).  The  S1  planar 
fabric  is  sub-parallel  to  bedding  and  the  general  orientation  of  lithostratigraphic  units 
(see  Fig.  2).  Fold  geometry  and  lineation  data  associated  with  this  early  deformation 
event  (D1s)  are  consistent  with  WSW-ENE-directed  shortening.  Structural  features 
associated  with  D1s  are  better  preserved  in  the  Yatela  area  than  further  south  in  the 
Sadiola area, which is characterised by penetrative reworking of the early fabric by the 
second episode of folding.  
The  second  structural  component  (D2s)  recorded  in  the  region  is  correlated  with  the 
formation  of  map-scale  NNE-trending  structural  corridors  (see  Fig.  2).  Early  F1  folds 
observed  in  the  Sadiola  Hill  and  FE3  open  pits  have  been  refolded  by  F2  creating 
interference patterns (Fig. 3, 4A). The F2 folds are disharmonic with upright to inclined 
fold  hinges.  They  are  associated  with  a  015º/75ºE  (e.g.  Sadiola  Hill,  Tambali, 
Alamoutala)  to  035º/75ºE  (e.g.  FE3,  FE4)  axial-planar  cleavage  (S2)  indicative  of  a 
WNW fold vergence (Fig. 3, 4B-C). Fold axes and intersection lineations plunge gently 
(15-30°) to the SSW or NNE (Fig. 3, 4D). These F2 folds are observed from the micro-
scale to the map-scale. A large-scale synclinal closure occurs between the FE3 and FE4 
open pits (see Fig. 2). A number of NNE-trending thrusts and high-angle reverse faults 
are closely associated with these F2 folds. Fold and fault geometry, and lineation data 
associated with the second deformation event (D2s) are consistent with NW-SE directed 
shortening.  
The following deformation event (D3s) is associated with the strike-slip reactivation of 
early accretionary structures (e.g., high-angle reverse faults, lithostratigraphic contacts, 
S1, S2) and the formation of NNE-trending sub-vertical shear zones. The Senegal-Mali 
Shear Zone consists of alterning high strain and low strain domains mapped along and 
across  the  lithological  contacts  between  igneous  and  sedimentary  rocks  in  the  region. 
186

--- Page 197 ---
The Sadiola Hill Fracture Zone, the Alamoutala Fracture Zone, and the FE4 Shear Zone 
(Fig. 3) represent sheared litho-stratigraphic interfaces (see Fig. 2). Such structures are 
2-50m  wide  and  are  associated  with  a  pinch-and-swell  anastomosing  geometry  that 
extends  both  along  strike  and  down  dip.  These  shear  zones  are  discontinuous  along 
strike  in  contrast  to  the  high-angle  NNE-trending  shear  zones.  Steeply-plunging 
parasitic folds in transposed impure marbles within 25 m of the Sadiola Fracture Zone 
exhibit  an  S-shaped  asymmetry,  indicating  of  a  component  of  sinistral  displacement 
along the structure (Fig. 3). Sub-horizontal slickenfibres marked by biotite and pyrite on 
the Alamoutala Fracture Zone indicate sinistral displacement (Fig. 3). Slickenfibres and 
micro-structural  kinematic  indicators  including  strain  shadows  and  mica  fish  also 
suggest  dominantly  sinistral  displacement  along  the  NNE-trending  high-angle  shear 
zones and reactivated S2 fabric (Fig. 3). Fault geometries and lineation data associated 
with  the  third  deformation  event  (D3s)  are  consistent  with  NNW-SSE-directed 
shortening.  Combined  channel  sampling  and  three-dimensional  rendering  of  the  assay 
data under Modelling under Leapfrog® shows that the linkage of steep  NNE-trending 
shears  with  reactivated  early  accretionary  structures  (e.g.,  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone, 
Alamoutala Fracture Zone, and FE4 Shear Zone) applied a direct control on ore shoot 
geometries in the Sadiola Hill, Alamoutala, FE3, and FE4 gold deposits (Fig. 4E-F). 
A very late deformation episode (D4s) is associated with a dextral reactivation of earlier 
accretionary  structures.  Chlorite-calcite  slickenfibres  on  rare  fault  walls  from  the 
Sadiola  Hill  and Alamoutala  open pits indicate late dextral displacement. Steep NNE-
trending  faults  associated  with  dextral  displacement  have  been  mapped  locally  in 
outcrop  over  the  Finman  plutonic  complex.  The  apparent  dextral  offset  of  the  Sadiola 
volcanics in map scale is tentatively associated with D4s.  
187

--- Page 198 ---
Figure  3.  Structural  correlation  chart  including  data  collected  for  the  Sadiola  Hill  open  pit,  the 
Yatela  open  pit,  and  ancillary  open  pits  in  the  region.  SFZ:  Sadiola  Fracture  Zone;  AFZ: 
Alamoutala Fracture Zone.  
188

--- Page 199 ---
Figure 4. A) Interference pattern resulting from refolding of F1 by upright F2 folds in the FE3 open 
pit. B) Typical F2 folds show axial-planar cleavage and asymmetry indicative of WNW vergence. C) 
Refraction  of  the  S2  cleavage  in  a  sandstone-siltstone  alternance.  D)  Pencil  lineation  in  siltstones. 
The  photograph  is  looking  down  stretching  lineation,  which  is  indicated  by  the  scribe  pen.  E) 
Channel  sampling  in  wall  rocks  of  the  mineralised  FE4  shear.  F)  Channel  sampling  across  the 
mineralised FE3 shear. 
189

--- Page 200 ---
5.3.  Geochronology 
A summary of the determined magmatic crystallisation ages for igneous rocks of 
the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  is  presented  in  Table  3.  The  following  classification  was 
based  on  structural  evidence  recorded  in  outcrop  and  absolute  timing  of  magma 
emplacement. 
Individual  SHRIMP  U-Pb  geochronology 
reports 
(petrographic 
descriptions, zircon morphology, analytical details, results, interpretation) are provided 
in the supplementary material. 
5.3.1.  Pre- to syn-D1s magmatism 
SAD-158β microdiorite and SAD-158grd hornblende-granodiorite: 
The  outcrop  was  mapped  on  a  ridge,  12  km  west  of  the  Sadiola  Hill  gold  mine.  The 
outcrop is part of the Finman plutonic complex, which is associated with a low U-K-Th 
signature in the radiometric data. The outcrop consists of microdiorite locally intruded 
hornblende-granodiorite melts (Fig. 5A-C). The microdiorite is composed of plagioclase 
feldspars  (50%  modal  vol.)  and  green  hornblende  (49%  modal  vol.)  with  traces  of 
magnetite (1% modal vol.). The melts are largely composed of quartz (44% modal vol.) 
and  plagioclase  feldspars  (42%  modal  vol.)  with  abundant  green  hornblende  (12% 
modal vol.) and minor magnetite (up to 2% modal vol.). Both rock types exhibit a solid 
state  planar  fabric  oriented  342º/83ºE.  Late  cm-wide  shear  zones  oriented  012º/78ºE 
crosscut the latter fabric and dextrally offset the hornblende-granodiorite melts in places 
(Fig.  5D).  Twenty-four  near-concordant  analyses  on  magmatic  zircons  from  the 
microdiorite yield a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2152 ± 7 Ma (MSWD = 1.7) and 
a Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia age of 2143 ± 9 Ma (MSWD = 1.16) (Fig. 5E). A 
Wetherill  U-Pb  Concordia  age  could  be  calculated  and  yielded  a  date  of  2147  ±  8 
(MSWD = 4.6). Twenty-three near-concordant analyses on zircons from the hornblende 
granodiorite yield a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2142 ± 6 Ma (MSWD = 1.4) and 
a Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia age of 2143 ± 8 Ma (MSWD = 1.06) (Fig. 5F). The 
2147  ±  8  Ma  date  is  interpreted  to  represent  the  magmatic  crystallisation  age  of  the 
microdiorite.  The  2142  ±  6  Ma  date  is  interpreted  to  represent  the  magmatic 
crystallisation age of the hornblende-granodiorite. 
190

--- Page 201 ---
Table 3. Summary U-Pb ages of igneous rocks from the Sadiola-Yatela region 
191

--- Page 202 ---
Figure 5. A) Field photograph of the outcrop within the Finman plutonic complex. A microdiorite 
pluton (SAD-158β) is locally intruded by hornblende-granodiorite melts (SAD-158grd), which give 
rocks of the outcrop an apparent breccia texture. B) Representative micrograph of the microdiorite 
(crossed polars). C) Representative micrograph of the hornblende-granodiorite (crossed polars). D) 
Dextral  cm-wide  shear  zones  offset  the  hornblende-granodiorite  melts  in  places.  E)  Tera-
Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia plot for zircon analyses from the microdiorite. F) Tera-Wasserburg U-
Pb Discordia plot for zircon analyses from the hornblende-granodiorite. *Black squares represent 
rejected analyses. 
192

--- Page 203 ---
5.3.2.  Syn-D2s magmatism 
SAD-077 quartz-feldspar-phyric andesite:  
Porphyritic  andesites  outcrop  in  and  surrounding  the  Sadiola  village  (Fig.  6A).  Rock 
samples  collected  at  different  locations  in  the  area  show  no  significant  mineralogical 
variations  and  consist of  feldspar  (up to 10%  modal  vol.) and quartz phenocrysts (2% 
modal vol.) set in a fine-grained (<0.1 mm) to very fine-grained (<0.05 mm) quartzo-
feldspathic groundmass (80% modal vol.). These rocks exhibit evidence for high strain 
solid-state  deformation  including  a  mylonitic  fabric  oriented  025º/85ºE,  strained 
porphyroclasts  with  tails,  and  a  sub-horizontal  lineation  plunging  at  5°  towards  025º 
(Fig.  6B).  Microtectonic  evidence  such  as  symmetrical  porphyroclasts  and  strain 
shadows indicate dominantly pure shear deformation. The presence of fractured feldspar 
porphyroclasts  and  fine  grain  size  of  the  recrystallised  quartz  groundmass  (<50  µm) 
together with the abundance of muscovite and biotite along the shear fabric suggest that 
the  mylonites  developed  at  low  metamorphic  grade  (~250-500°C)  (e.g.,  Passchier  and 
Trouw et al., 2005). A least-deformed and least-altered sample of feldspar-quartz-phyric 
andesite was collected 3 km south from the Sadiola village for geochronology (Fig. 6C). 
Inheritance  proved  to  be  common  in  that  sample  based  on  the  207Pb/206Pb  age 
distribution. A single zircon analysis yielded a 207Pb/206Pb date of 2249 ± 8 Ma. Twenty 
zircon  analyses  defined  a  second  population  associated  with  a  207Pb/206Pb  weighted 
mean  date  of  2166  ±  7  Ma  (MSWD  =  1.16).  Eleven  zircon  analyses  defined  a  third 
population associated with a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2118 ± 9 Ma (MSWD = 
0.47)  and  a  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb  Discordia  date  of  2115  ±  11  Ma  (MSWD  =  0.41) 
(Fig.  6D).  The  younger  date  of  2118  ±  9  Ma  is  interpreted  to  represent  the  magmatic 
crystallisation  age  of  the  porphyritic  andesite.  The  two  older  dates  likely  represent 
inherited zircon components. 
193

--- Page 204 ---
SD1071-285m quartz-feldspar-porphyry: 
Steep NNE-trending  quartz-feldspar-porphyry dykes have been  mapped in the  Sadiola 
Hill and Tambali open pits. The quartz-feldspar-porphyritic dykes are generally 1-2 m 
wide  and  are  spatially  associated  with  NNE-trending  faults  oriented  020º/75ºE.  These 
dykes crosscut an early generation of diorite as well as impure carbonates and detrital 
sedimentary rocks in the Sadiola Hill open pit. These dykes were locally folded by F2 
and  boudinaged.  They  were  also  sheared  during  subsequent  D3s  deformation  and  host 
mineralisation  at  Sadiola  Hill  and  Tambali.  A  least-deformed  and  least-altered  sample 
of quartz-feldspar porphyry was collected from deep diamond drill core at Sadiola Hill. 
The rock exhibits sub-rounded sparse quartz (5-10% modal vol.) and euhedral prismatic 
feldspar phenocrysts (5-10% modal vol.) set in a fine-grained (<0.1 mm) to very fine-
grained  (<0.05  mm)  equant  quartzo-feldspathic  groundmass  (80-90%  modal  vol.). 
Inheritance  also  proved  to  be  common  in  that  sample  based  on  the  207Pb/206Pb  age 
distribution. Three zircon analyses yielded a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2200 ± 
23 Ma. Eight zircon analyses defined a second population associated with a 207Pb/206Pb 
weighted mean date of 2147 ± 12 Ma (MSWD = 0.67). Twelve zircon analyses defined 
a  third  population  associated  with  a  207Pb/206Pb  weighted  mean  date  of  2108  ±  9  Ma 
(MSWD = 0.67) and a Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia date of 2105 ± 11 Ma (MSWD 
=  0.89).  The  younger  date  of  2108  ±  9  Ma  is  interpreted  to  represent  the  magmatic 
crystallisation age of the quartz-feldspar-porphyry.  
194

--- Page 205 ---
Figure  6.  A)  Field  photograph  of  deformed  intermediate  volcanic  rocks  surrounding  the  Sadiola 
village. B) Representative micrograph of a mylonite after quartz-feldspar-phyric andesite (crossed 
polars).  C)  Representative  field  photograph  of  the  least-deformed  and  least-altered  quartz-
feldspar-phyric andesite (SAD-077). D) Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia plot for zircon analyses 
from  SAD-077.  *Black  squares  represent  rejected  analyses;  identified  zircon  populations  are 
colour-coded. 
195

--- Page 206 ---
STA-037 diorite: 
A set of NNE-trending diorite dykes (<2 m wide) was identified in the Sadiola Hill and 
Tambali  open  pits.  Although  no  direct  crosscutting  relationships  could  be  observed  at 
Sadiola  Hill,  these  dykes  crosscut  the  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  dykes  at  the  Tambali 
ancillary pits. These diorite dykes are locally affected by F2 folding and display a well-
defined  shear  foliation  marked  by  aligned  sulphides  at  the  Tambali  open  pits.  Despite 
extensive weathering conditions due to the shallow level of mining activity at the time 
of fieldwork, a sample was collected from bench walls for geochronology. The rock is 
essentially  composed  of  plagioclase  feldspars  (>80%  modal  vol.)  with  minor  quartz 
(<10%  modal  vol.)  and  green  actinolitic  hornblende  (up  to  6%  modal  vol.).  An  older 
population defined by 12 zircons yielded a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2161.5 ± 
7 Ma (MSWD = 1.2). A younger population defined by 12 zircons yielded a 207Pb/206Pb 
weighted  mean  date  of  2114  ±  9  Ma  (MSWD  =  1.17)  and  a  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb 
Discordia date of 2119 ± 15 Ma (MSWD = 1.11). The younger date of 2114 ± 9 Ma is 
interpreted  to  represent  the  magmatic  crystallisation  age  of  the  diorite,  which  falls 
within error of that of the intruded quartz-feldspar-porphyry dykes. The older date likely 
represents an inherited zircon component. 
SAD-185 feldspar-phyric biotite-granodiorite: 
A  feldspar-phyric  biotite-granodiorite  sample  was  collected  from  outcrop  5  km 
southwest  of  the  Alamoutala  open  pit  (Fig.  7A).  The  rock  is  composed  of  feldspar 
phenocrysts  (up  to  30%  modal  vol.)  and  minor  biotite  (5%  modal  vol.)  set  in  a  fine-
grained  quartzo-feldspathic  groundmass  (65%  modal  vol.).  Intrusive  rocks  of  the 
outcrop exhibit a dominant planar fabric oriented 196º/66ºNW, which is parallel to S2. 
Magmatic  biotite  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  feldspar  phenocrysts  are  stretched  along  that 
fabric suggesting deformation occurred at sub-solidus conditions (i.e. magmatic fabric) 
(Fig. 7B). Two zircon analyses yielded  207Pb/206Pb dates of 2137 ± 21 Ma and 2149 ± 
16  Ma.  Twenty-two  zircon  analyses  defined  a  second  population  associated  with  a 
207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2083 ± 6 Ma (MSWD = 1.5) and a Tera-Wasserburg 
U-Pb  Discordia  date  of  2083  ±  7  Ma  (MSWD  =  1.4)  (Fig.  7C).  The  younger  date  of 
2083 ± 6 Ma is interpreted to represent the magmatic crystallisation age of the feldspar-
phyric biotite-granodiorite. The two older dates fall within error and likely represent an 
inherited zircon component.  
196

--- Page 207 ---
SAD-085 quartz-monzonite: 
A quartz-monzonite sample was collected from outcrop 11 km south of the Sadiola Hill 
open pit. The small pluton intrudes intermediate volcanics. The intrusive rock consists 
of quartz phenocrysts (up to 10% modal vol.) set into a fine-grained muscovite-biotite-
carbonate-rich  groundmass.  The  intrusive  rock  exhibits  a  pervasive  planar  fabric 
oriented 122º/74ºSW, which is parallel to S2. The planar fabric is marked by stretched 
quartz  phenocrysts,  suggesting  deformation  occurred  at  sub-solidus  conditions  (i.e. 
magmatic fabric). Such fabric is associated with a well-defined lineation plunging 25º 
towards  295º.  Nineteen  near-concordant  analyses  on  zircons  yielded  a  207Pb/206Pb 
weighted  mean  date  of  2081  ±  3  Ma  (MSWD  =  0.99)  and  a  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb 
Discordia date of 2082 ± 6 Ma (MSWD = 0.76). The 2081 ± 3 Ma date is interpreted to 
represent the magmatic crystallisation age of the quartz-monzonite. 
SAD-096 hornblende-biotite-bearing quartz-monzodiorite: 
A hornblende-biotite-bearing quartz-monzodiorite sample was collected from outcrop 3 
km  west  of  the  Alamoutala  open  pit  (Fig.  7D).  The  rock  is  largely  composed  of 
plagioclase  feldspars  (75%  modal  vol.)  with  abundant  green  hornblende  (up  to  15% 
modal  vol.),  minor  biotite  (2%  modal  vol.)  and  traces  of  magnetite  (up  to  2%  modal 
vol.) (Fig. 7E). The plutonic rock does not exhibit any sub-solidus or solid-state fabric. 
The  pluton  is  associated  with  a  hornblende-hornfels  skarn  aureole  in  surrounding 
detrital  meta-sedimentary 
rocks.  Contact-metamorphic  mineral 
assemblages 
preferentially  developed  along  a  planar  fabric  oriented  150º/60ºW  in  meta-sediments. 
They consist of hornblende, actinolite, and epidote with traces of pyrite and magnetite. 
Zircon yield for the hornblende-biotite-bearing quartz-monzodiorite was poor (n=20<). 
Ten  near-concordant  analyses  on  zircons  yield  a  207Pb/206Pb  weighted  mean  date  of 
2089 ± 7 Ma (MSWD = 0.47) and a Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia date of 2092 ± 13 
Ma  (MSWD  =  0.44)  (Fig.  7F).  The  2089  ±  7  Ma  date  is  interpreted  to  represent  the 
magmatic crystallisation age of the hornblende-biotite-bearing quartz-monzodiorite. The 
absolute  crystallisation  age  suggests  that  it  emplaced  syn-D2s.  The  absence  of  fabric 
indicates it emplaced in a low strain zone.  
197

--- Page 208 ---
Figure  7.  A)  Field  photograph  of  the  feldspar-phyric  biotite-granodiorite  (SAD-185).  B) 
Representative micrograph of the pluton (crossed polars). Stretched magmatic feldspar and biotite 
minerals indicate the syn-tectonic emplacement of the pluton. C) Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia 
plot  for  zircon  analyses  from  SAD-185.  D)  Field  photograph  of  the  hornblende-biotite-bearing 
quartz-monzodiorite  (SAD-096).  E)  Representative  micrograph  of  the  pluton  (crossed  polars) 
showing  abundant  primary  hornblende.  F)  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb  Discordia  plot  for  zircon 
analyses from SAD-096. *Black squares represent rejected analyses; identified zircon populations 
are colour-coded. 
198

--- Page 209 ---
SAD-102 biotite-bearing quartz-monzonite: 
A biotite-bearing quartz-monzonite sample was collected from outcrop 7 km northwest 
of the Sadiola Hill open pit on the road to the Alamoutala village. The intrusive rock is 
light pink and has a weak magnetic response using a magnetic scribe pen. The rock is 
composed  of  plagioclase  and  alkali  feldspars  (80%  modal  vol.),  quartz  (15%  modal 
vol.), minor biotite (5% modal vol.), and traces of magnetite (up to 1% modal vol.). The 
rock does not exhibit any sub-solidus or solid-state fabric. Zircon yield for the quartz-
monzonite was poor (n=15<). Two zircon analyses yielded  207Pb/206Pb dates of 2136 ± 
10 Ma and 2147 ± 9 Ma. Seven zircon analyses defined a second population associated 
with  a  207Pb/206Pb  weighted  mean  date  of  2091  ±  8  Ma  (MSWD  =  1.6).  The  date  of 
2091 ± 8 Ma is interpreted to represent the magmatic crystallisation age of the biotite-
bearing quartz-monzonite. The two older dates fall within error and likely represent an 
inherited  zircon  component.  The  absolute  crystallisation  age  suggests  that  the  biotite-
bearing  quartz-monzonite  emplaced  syn-D2s.  The  absence  of  fabric  indicates  it 
emplaced in a low strain zone. 
SAD-182 hornblende-biotite-granodiorite: 
A hornblende-biotite-granodiorite sample was collected from outcrop 3 km northwest of 
the  Bembokoto  village.  The  rock  is  largely  composed  of  plagioclase  feldspars  (>65% 
modal vol.) and quartz (25% modal vol.) with minor green hornblende (up to 5% modal 
vol.)  and  biotite  (3%  modal  vol.).  Rocks  of  the  outcrop  are  overall  undeformed  but 
locally exhibit cm-wide shear zones. These structures are marked by a solid state planar 
fabric oriented N010/60E and S-C fabrics indicating sinistral displacement. Late barren 
quartz veins crosscut the intrusion and are oriented N282/85N. A single zircon analysis 
yielded  a  207Pb/206Pb  date  of  2188  ±  15  Ma.  Eleven  zircon  analyses  defined  a  second 
population associated with a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2090 ± 9 Ma (MSWD = 
1.5)  and  a  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb  Discordia  date  of  2103  ±  20  Ma  (MSWD  =  0.98). 
The younger date of 2090 ± 9 Ma is interpreted to represent the magmatic crystallisation 
age of the hornblende-biotite-granodiorite. The older date likely represents an inherited 
zircon  component.  The  absolute  crystallisation  age  and  late  cm-wide  shear  zones 
suggest that the hornblende-biotite-granodiorite emplaced syn-D2s in a low strain zone.  
199

--- Page 210 ---
5.3.3.  Syn-D3s magmatism 
SAD-033 biotite-granite: 
A biotite-granite sample was collected from outcrop 1 km east of the Bembokoto village 
(Fig.  8A).  The  intrusive  rock  consists  of  feldspar  phenocrysts  (up  to  20%  modal  vol., 
alkali > plagioclase) and minor biotite  (3%  modal vol.) set in a finer-grained quartzo-
feldspathic  groundmass  (80%  modal  vol.)  (Fig.  8B).  Stretched  feldspar  minerals  and 
aligned mafic enclaves mark a pronounced planar fabric oriented 341º/82ºE. The latter 
fabric  is  associated  with  a  sub-horizontal  lineation  plunging  13º  towards  161º.  The 
dominant fabric is locally overprinted by cm-wide D3s shear zones oriented 315º/85ºW. 
These shears sinistrally offset the mafic enclaves in places. Two zircon analysis yielded 
207Pb/206Pb dates of 2129 ± 17 Ma and 2132 ± 14 Ma. Thirteen zircon analyses defined 
a second population associated with a  207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2066 ± 8 Ma 
(MSWD = 1.19) and a Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia date of 2069 ± 14 (MSWD = 
1.07)  (Fig.  8C).  The  younger  date  of  2066  ±  8  Ma  is  interpreted  to  represent  the 
magmatic crystallisation age of the biotite-granite. The two older dates fall within error 
and likely represent an inherited zircon component.  
SAD-075 biotite-granite: 
A  biotite-granite  sample  was  collected  from  outcrop  5  km  east  of  the  Kinboukourou 
village (Fig. 8D). The rock is composed of feldspar phenocrysts (15% modal vol.) and 
tabular  brown  biotite  (5%  modal  vol.)  set  in  a  medium-grained  quartzo-feldspathic 
groundmass (80% modal vol.) (Fig. 8E). Stretched feldspar phenocrysts mark a planar 
fabric  oriented  135º/65ºSW.  The  biotite-granite  is  cut  by  an  aplite  dyke  that  exhibits 
folding axial-planar to that fabric. Two zircon analysis yielded 207Pb/206Pb dates of 2113 
±  10  Ma  and  2123  ±  7  Ma.  Fifteen  zircon  analyses  defined  a  second  population 
associated with a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2071 ± 5 Ma (MSWD = 1.4) and a 
Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia date of 2072 ± 9 Ma (MSWD = 0.91) (Fig. 8F). The 
younger date of 2071 ± 5 Ma is interpreted to represent the magmatic crystallisation age 
of  the  biotite-granite.  The  two  older  dates  fall  within  error  and  likely  represent  an 
inherited zircon component.  
200

--- Page 211 ---
Figure  8  A)  Field  photograph  of  the  deformed  biotite-granite  (SAD-033).  B)  Representative 
micrograph  of  the  pluton  (crossed  polars).  C)  Tera-Wasserburg  U-Pb  Discordia  plot  for  zircon 
analyses  from  SAD-033.  D)  Field  photograph  of  the  deformed  biotite-granite  (SAD-075).  E) 
Representative micrograph of the pluton (crossed polars). F) Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia plot 
for  zircon  analyses  from  SAD-075.  *Black  squares  represent  rejected  analyses;  identified  zircon 
populations are colour-coded. 
201

--- Page 212 ---
SAD-065 biotite-monzogranite: 
A  biotite-monzogranite  sample  was  collected  from  outcrop  4  km  northwest  of  the 
Neteko  village.  The  intrusive  rock  is  light  pink  and  has  a  strong  magnetic  response 
using  a  magnetic  scribe  pen.  The  rock  is  largely  composed  of  alkali  and  plagioclase 
feldspars (75% modal vol.) and quartz (20% modal vol.) with minor biotite (3% modal 
vol.)  and  traces  of  magnetite  (1%  modal  vol.).  A  single  zircon  analysis  yielded  a 
207Pb/206Pb date of 2132 ± 9 Ma. Thirteen zircon analyses defined a second population 
associated with a 207Pb/206Pb weighted mean date of 2074 ± 8 Ma (MSWD = 2.1) and a 
Tera-Wasserburg U-Pb Discordia date of 2082 ± 13 Ma (MSWD = 1.0). The younger 
date of 2074 ± 8 Ma is interpreted to represent the magmatic crystallisation age of the 
biotite-monzogranite.  The  older  date  likely  represents  an  inherited  zircon  component. 
The absence of any fabric precluded the accurate integration of the pluton with respect 
to  the  local  structural  framework.  The  absolute  crystallisation  age  and  comparable 
petrographic  characteristics  with  SAD-033  and  SAD-075,  however,  suggest  that  the 
biotite-monzogranite emplaced syn-D3s in a low strain zone.  
202

--- Page 213 ---
Figure  9.  Three-tier  classification  scheme  by  Frost  et  al.  (2001)  A)  Fe*  vs.  SiO2  diagram,  which 
conveys  information  about  the  differentiation  history  of  the  feldspars  in  the  rocks  and  which  is 
related  to  the  sources  of  the  magmas.  B)  Modified  alkali-lime  index  vs.  SiO2  diagram,  which  is 
related  to  the  sources  of  the  magmas.  C)  Aluminium  saturation  index  vs.  SiO2  diagram,  which  is 
related to the magma sources and the conditions of melting. 
204

--- Page 214 ---
Figure 10. Selected Harker diagrams A) MgO vs. SiO2 B) Fe2O3 vs. SiO2 C) K2O vs. SiO2 D) Na2O 
vs. SiO2. Additional major element igneous chemistry data for the eastern KKI from Ndiaye et al. 
(1997) and Schwartz and Melcher (2004) are presented for comparison.  
5.4.2.  Trace elements 
  Chondrite-normalised  REE  plots  (Sun  and  McDonough,  1989)  associated  with 
syn-D1s plutonic rocks show flat REE patterns, with (La/Yb)N ratios between 2.35 and 
2.99  (Fig.  11A).  Spider  plots  normalised  to  Primitive  mantle  (Sun  and  McDonough, 
1989) show a similar trend, with no enrichment of the LREE over the HREE (Fig. 11B). 
The  hornblende-granodiorite  shows  marked  positive  Zr  and  Hf  anomalies  compared 
with the diorite pattern. These positive anomalies are likely related to an extensive fluid 
evolution of the same magma or an enriched source. All syn-D2s Eburnean plutonic and 
volcanic  rocks  but  quartz-feldspar-porphyry  from  the  Sadiola  Hill  open  pit  exhibit 
equivalent REE patterns, suggesting that magmas shared a common parent, process or 
contaminant. Chondrite-normalised REE plots for the quartz-feldspar-porphyry samples 
show flat patterns, with (La/Yb)N ratios between 1.08 and 1.83 (Fig. 11C). The patterns 
are  characterised  by  marked  negative  Eu  anomalies  (Eu/Eu*  between  0.33  and  0.36). 
205

--- Page 215 ---
Figure 11a. REE patterns normalised to chondrite and spider plot normalised to primitive mantle 
(after  Sun  and  McDonough,  1989).  A-B)  Pre-  to  syn-D1s  granitoids.  C-D)  Syn-D2s  quartz-feldspar 
porphyry. E-F) Syn-D2s porphyritic andesite. 
207

--- Page 216 ---
Figure 11b. REE patterns normalised to chondrite and spider plot normalised to primitive mantle 
(after Sun and McDonough, 1989). G-H) Syn-D2s quartz-monzonite to granodiorite plutons. G-H) 
Syn-D3s biotite-granites.  
208

--- Page 217 ---
6. Discussion 
6.1.  Geological framework for the Sadiola-Yatela region 
6.1.1.  Structural evolution 
Country  rocks  have  undergone  polycyclic  deformation,  which  included  early 
fold-and-thrust tectonics (D1s, D2s) followed by transcurrent tectonics (D3s, D4s). Little is 
known about D1s but the D2s and D3s events were responsible for the formation of map-
scale  structures.  The  D2s  and  D3s  events  mark  the  principal  imprint  of  the  Eburnean 
orogeny in the region and were associated with massive magmatic addition. The bulk of 
the gold mineralisation in the region occured during D3s, with sinistral displacement and 
hydrothermal  fluid  circulation  along  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  and  steep  NNE-
trending shear zones connected to structural traps in the Kofi basin. The Senegal-Mali 
Shear  Zone,  however,  does  not  correlate  in  the  field  with  a  continuous  crustal-scale 
structure  (e.g.,  Bassot  and  Dommanget,  1986;  Ledru  et  al.,  1991).  In  contrast,  the 
Senegal-Mali Shear Zone is represented by alterning high strain and low strain domains 
separating  two  distinct  volcanic  and  sedimentary  lithostratigraphic  domains  that  occur 
at similar metamorphic grades. Within the high strain domains, microtectonic evidence 
such  as  stretched  porphyroclasts  and  symmetrical  strain  shadows  indicate  a  dominant 
component of flattening (i.e. pure shear deformation). Such results are consistent with 
the  interpretation  that  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  formed  as  a  transpressional  fault 
during the onset of D2s (Lawrence et al., 2013a). It cannot be excluded, however, that 
the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone  represents  a  tectonic  discontinuity  operating  since  the 
early convergence stage (D1s).  
6.1.2.  Magmatic evolution 
Volcanic and plutonic rocks represent an important part of the exposed crust in 
the region. The granitoids from the region display a temporal evolution from ca. 2150-
2080 Ma calc-alkaline metaluminous plutons to ca. 2080-2060 Ma peraluminous high-K 
granites. The volcanic and plutonic rocks show distinct variations in their trace and rare 
209

--- Page 218 ---
earth  element  chemistry,  which  cannot  be  solely  attributed  to  the  respective  nature  of 
their  host  terranes  (i.e.  volcanic  belt-type  vs.  basin-type  plutons).  The  least-evolved 
rocks  are  correlated  with  plutons  of  the  Finman  complex  and  the  Sadiola  Hill  quartz-
feldspar-porphyry.  These  rocks  are  associated  with  relatively  flat  REE  patterns, 
suggesting  derivation  from  a  shallow  source.  In  contrast,  the  REE  patterns  associated 
with  other  Eburnean  volcanic  and  plutonic  rocks  suggest  derivation  from  either  a 
metasomatised  mantle  source  with  crustal  contamination  (e.g.,  Egal  et  al.,  2002)  or 
melting  of  an  enriched  lower-crustal  garnet-amphibolite  source  (e.g.,  Doumbia  et  al., 
1998;  Pouclet  et  al.,  2006).  These  rocks  have  a  calc-alkaline  affinity  and  are 
characterised  by  negative  Nb-Ta  anomalies,  marked  Pb  positive  anomalies  and  high 
LIL/HFS  ratios.  Such  characteristics  are  compatible  with  distinctive  features  of 
subduction  zone  magmatism  in  modern-day  active  continental  margin  context  (e.g., 
Hawkesworth  and  Kemp,  2006;  Moyen  and  Martin,  2012).  The  Fe*  values  associated 
with  magmatic  rocks  of  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  reflect  a  close  affinity  to  relatively 
hydrous, oxidised magmas and source regions (e.g., Frost and Lindsley, 1991), which is 
compatible  with  arc  magmas  (e.g.,  Richards,  2011).  The  hydrous  nature  of  these 
Eburnean magmatic rocks is supported by the abundance of magmatic hornblende and 
biotite  (e.g.,  Ridolfi  et  al.,  2010).  The  relatively  high  magmatic  oxidation  states  are 
reflected  by  the  stability  of  titanite  in  a  large  number  of  these  volcanic  and  plutonic 
rocks (e.g., Foley and Wheller, 1990). It cannot be excluded, however, that these trace 
element signatures may have been inherited (i.e. remelting of older subduction-related 
calc-alkaline  magmatic  rocks  or  melting  of  sedimentary  rocks  derived  from  such 
magmatic rocks).  
6.2. 
Integration with regional geology and tectonics 
The  new  magmatic  crystallisation  ages  were 
integrated  with  available 
geochronological  data  for  the  KKI  into  a  space-time  chart  (Figure  12).  The  synthesis 
indicates  that  magmatic  activity  in  the  inlier  lasted  from  ca.  2210  Ma  to  2060  Ma 
without  evidence  for  long  periods  of  magmatic  quiescence.  Inherited  zircon  ages 
reported  in  this  study  indicate  either  that  early  Birimian  magmatism  occurred  in  the 
Kofi basin between ca. 2220 and 2150 Ma, or that sedimentary rocks of the Kofi basin 
210

--- Page 219 ---
partly derived from the Mako bimodal volcanic rocks. Eburnean granitoids in the KKI 
display a similar evolution from calc-alkaline metaluminous diorite-granodiorite plutons 
to peraluminous high-K granites (e.g., Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Dioh et al., 2006; Gueye 
et  al.,  2008).  Geochronological  data  also  shows  the  syn-volcanic  nature  of  Eburnean 
plutonism. Field relationships and geochronology data indicate that sediment deposition 
in the Kofi and Dialé-Daléma basins most likely initiated during early convergence (D1) 
coeval  with  the  onset  of  calc-alkaline  magmatism.  The  diachroneity  of  the  recorded 
magmatic  ages  is  reflected  in  the  provenance  of  the  sediments,  which  further 
strengthened  the  hypothesis  that  the  Kofi  and  Dialé-Daléma  represented  syn-
deformational  basins  in  a  convergent  setting.  The  evolution  from  fold-and-thrust 
tectonics  to  transcurrent  tectonics  identified  in  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  has  similarly 
been  proposed  for  the  Mako  area  (Diene  et  al.,  2012)  and  the  Loulo  area  (Dabo  and 
Aïfa,  2010;  Lawrence  et  al.,  2013a).  Available  geochronological  data  suggest  that  the 
emplacement of most granitoids took place within a short time span between ca. 2115 
and 2060 Ma, which is the best time estimate for the Eburnean orogeny in the KKI. The 
iron skarns of the Falémé district formed post-peak metamorphism at ca. 2080 Ma and 
are  spatially  and  genetically  associated  with  syn-kinematic  plutons  such  as  the 
Balangouma  monzodiorite 
and 
the  Boboti 
clinopyroxene-hornblende-bearing 
granodiorite  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Schwartz  and  Melcher,  2004;  Lawrence  et  al., 
2013a; Lambert-Smith, 2014). The similar relative timing and structural setting between 
gold deposits of the Sadiola-Yatela region and other deposits of the KKI (e.g., Loulo, 
Lawrence et al., 2013a; Massawa, Treloar et al., 2014) suggests that gold mineralisation 
occurred  subsequently  during  a  period  of  transcurrent  tectonics  that  outlasted 
emplacement  of  the  peraluminous  high-K  granites,  after  the  cessation  of  regional 
compressional  deformation.  It  is  likely  that  the  late  Eburnean  magmatic  activity 
participated  in  the  generation  of  thermal  gradients,  which  produced  regional  fluid 
systems  capable  of  transpoting  gold  (e.g.,  Masurel  et  al.,  a,  b).  Alternatively,  the 
hydrous  nature  of  the  Eburnean  magmas  in  the  region  could  explain  the  enhanced 
fertility for the formation of gold magmatic-hydrothermal systems upon shallow crustal 
emplacement (e.g., Massawa, Treloar et al., 2014).  
211

--- Page 220 ---
212

--- Page 222 ---
Figure 12. Summary space-time chart integrating new results with available geochronological data 
for  the  KKI  given  in  Table  1.  The  proposed  relative  timing  of  iron  skarn  mineralisation  in  the 
Falémé belt is consistent with studies by Schwartz and Melcher (2004), Lawrence et al. (2013a) and 
Lambert-Smith (2014). The proposed relative timing of gold mineralisation in the KKI is consistent 
with  economic  geology  studies  by  Lawrence  et  al.  (2013a,  b)  for  the  Loulo  district,  Treloar  et  al. 
(2014) for the Massawa gold deposit, and Masurel et al. (in press a, b, c) for the Sadiola district.  
6.3. 
Implications for the geodynamic evolution of the KKI 
The Dy/Dy* vs. Dy/Yb diagram by Davidson et al. (2013) is a powerful tool to 
represent  the  shapes  of  REE  patterns  and  allows  to  constrain  magma  sources  and 
petrogenetic processes. A compilation of available data for volcanic and plutonic rocks 
of the KKI is presented in such diagram in Figure 13. When compared to age data, the 
compiled geochemical data support the evolution from a volcanic arc environment to an 
active continental margin. Representative volcanic rocks of the Mako belt likely derived 
from variably depleted mantle sources (Fig. 13). These volcanic rocks have formed in 
an immature oceanic plateau (e.g., Abouchami et al., 1990; Boher et al., 1992; Ngom et 
al., 2009) or in an immature oceanic island arc (e.g., Sylvester and Attoh, 1992; Dia et 
al., 1997; Diallo, 2001; Pawlig et al., 2006). In contrast, the vast majority of Eburnean 
volcanic  and  plutonic  rocks  overlap  with  middle  and  upper  continental  crust 
compositions  (Fig.  13).  The  general  concave-down  pattern  from  the  MORB  field  to 
upper continental crust compositions reflects a differentiation trend with amphibole as a 
major mineral phase control (fractionated or residual). The relative scatter in the field of 
Eburnean granitoids likely reflects variable incorporation of sedimentary material. This 
is  compatible  with  the  fact  that  magmas  in  more  mature  arcs  typically  stall  at  density 
barriers  in  the  mantle  or  at  one  or  more  levels  in  the  crust,  where  they  undergo  wall-
rock  assimilation  and  fractionated  crystallisation  (e.g.,  De  Paolo,  1981),  or  MASH 
(melting,  assimilation,  storage,  homogenisation)  processes  (e.g.,  Annen  et  al.,  2006). 
The late Eburnean peraluminous high-K granites (e.g., Saraya, Gamaye) plot to the far 
right  of  the  diagram,  suggesting  the  presence  of  garnet  in  deep  residual  sources  and 
crustal  contamination  (Fig.  13).  The  existence  of  a  thickened  lithosphere  has  been 
proposed  by  Lambert-Smith  et  al.  (in  press)  to  allow  garnet  to  become  stable  in  the 
magma  source  region  for  these  high-K  granites.  Although  similar  in  timing,  the  late 
peraluminous  biotite-granites  from  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  are  distinct  from  the 
213

--- Page 223 ---
Saraya-type monzogranites. The evolution from metaluminous to peraluminous magmas 
in the Sadiola-Yatela region was probably related to the fractionation of hydrous melts 
at  increasing  pressure  without  crustal  contamination  (e.g.,  Richards,  2011;  Loucks, 
2014).  
The  evolution  from  primitive  island  arc  granitoids  to  evolved  peraluminous  granitic 
melts  observed  in  the  KKI  is  analogous  to  that  of  modern  active  margins  (e.g.,  Gill, 
1981). This is supported by findings from Ganne et al. (2011) who recorded evidence 
for blueschist metamorphism in the ca. 2200-2000 Ma rocks of West Africa, suggesting 
that subduction was at play in the Paleoproterozoic era.  
214

--- Page 225 ---
Figure 13. Plot of Dy/Dy* vs. Dy/Yb (after Davidson et al., 2013). Vectors for mineral control and 
melting  are  indicative.  PM,  primitive  mantle;  DM,  depleted  mantle;  GLOSS,  average  global 
subducting sediment; LCC, lower continental crust; MCC, middle continental crust; UCC, upper 
continental  crust.  Additional  geochemistry  data  for  the  KKI  from  Ndiaye  et  al.  (1997);  Schwartz 
and Melcher (2004); Pawlig et al. (2006); Dioh et al. (2006) and Lambert-Smith et al. (in press) are 
presented for comparison.  
215

--- Page 226 ---
6.4.  Comparison with other Birimian terranes and diachroneity of 
geological development 
The  ca.  2110-2070  Ma  volcanic  rocks  exposed  in  the  KKI  are  younger  than 
volcanic rocks in the Baoulé-Mossi domain. Thus far, ca. 2100 Ma volcanic ages have 
only  been  reported  in  Côte  d’Ivoire  (Fétékro  belt,  Leake,  1992;  Ouango  Fitini  belt, 
Hirdes  et  al.,  1996).  In  addition,  the  2071  ±  5  Ma  and  2066  ±  8  Ma  magmatic 
crystallisation  ages  of  the  peraluminous  biotite-granites  in  the  Kofi  basin  are  the 
youngest plutonic ages so far reported from the Baoulé-Mossi domain. The polycyclic 
deformation  history  recorded  in  the  KKI  is  similar  to  that  reported  at  the  scale  of  the 
West African Craton (In Ivory Coast, Pouclet et al., 2006; Vidal et al., 2009; in Burkina 
Faso, Hein, 2010; Baratoux et al., 2011; in northern Guinea, Lahondère et al., 2002; in 
southern Mali, Liégeois et al., 1991; Milési et al., 1992; Olson et al., 1992; McFarlane 
et al., 2011; in southern Ghana, Allibone et al., 2002a, b). As for the KKI, the bulk of 
gold  mineralisation  in  the  Ashanti  belt  of  Ghana  occurred  during  a  period  of 
transcurrent tectonics, after  the cessation of regional-scale compressional deformation. 
The  best  age  estimate  for  region-wide  world-class  orogenic  gold  mineralisation  in  the 
Ashanti  belt,  however,  is  constrained  to  2105  ±  2  Ma  (Oberthür  et  al.,  1998).  By 
comparison, regional orogenic gold mineralisation is younger in the KKI and is better 
correlated with the 2063 ± 9 Ma minor gold phase reported in the Damang area (Pigois 
et al., 2003) or the 2074 ± 14 Ma gold phase at Morila in southern Mali (McFarlane et 
al., 2011). Regional peak metamorphism was dated at ca. 2100 Ma in the Ashanti belt of 
southern Ghana (Oberthür et al., 1998) whereas metamorphic monazite and titanite from 
west  to  central  Ivory  Coast  record  regional  metamorphism  at  2080  ±  10  Ma 
(Kouamelan, 1996). Metamorphic age patterns in the KKI extend from ca. 2070 to 2030 
Ma (e.g., Hirdes et al., 2002; Gueye et al., 2007), but largely result from cooling after 
the late Eburnean tectono-thermal event. Nevertheless, the spatial distribution pattern of 
metamorphic ages in medium to high-level Birimian rocks suggests diachroneity of the 
Eburnean  tectono-thermal  event.  The  data  presented  in  this  study  further  supports  the 
suggestion  that  the  Eburnean  tectono-magmatic  activity  affected  the  Baoulé-Mossi 
domain diachronously from SE to NW as first proposed by Hirdes and Davis (2002). 
216

--- Page 227 ---
Baratoux, L., Metelka, V., Naba, S., Jessell, M.W., Grégoire, M., and Ganne, J., 2011. 
Juvenile Paleoproterozoic crust evolution during the Eburnean orogeny (ca. 2.2–
2.0 Ga), western Burkina Faso. Precambrian Research 191, 18-45. 
Bassot, J.P., 1987. Le complexe volcano-plutonique calco-alcalin de la rivière Daléma 
(Est  Sénégal):  discussion  de  sa  signification  géodynamique  dans  le  cadre  de 
l'orogénie  eburnéenne  (Protérozoïque  inférieur).  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences 6, 505-519. 
Bassot,  J.P.,  and  Dommanget,  A.,  1986.  Mise  en  évidence  d’un  accident  majeur 
affectant  le  Protérozoïque  inférieur  des  confins  sénégalo-maliens.  Comptes 
Rendus Géosciences 302, 1101–1106. 
Bassot,  J.P.,  and  Caen-Vachette,  M.,  1984.  Données  géochronologiques  et 
géochimiques nouvelles sur les granitoïdes de l'Est du Sénégal: Implications sur 
l'histoire géologique du Birimien de cette région, in Klerkx, J., Michot, J., eds., 
African Geology: Belgium, Tervuren, p. 196-209. 
Bessoles, B., 1977. Géologie de l’Afrique, le craton ouest-africain. Mémoire BRGM 
88. 
Bierlein, F.P., Groves, D.I., Goldfarb, R.J., and  Dubé, B., 2006. Lithospheric controls 
on the formation of provinces hosting giant orogenic gold deposits. Mineralium 
Deposita 40, 874-886. 
Boher, M., Abouchami, W., Michard, A., Albarede, F., and Arndt, N.T., 1992. Crustal 
Growth in West Africa at 2.1 Ga. Journal of Geophysical Research 97, 345-369. 
Bosse, H.R., Gwosdz, W., Lorenz, W., Markwich, H., Roth, W., and Wolff, F., 1996. 
Limestone and dolostone resources of Africa. Geologisches Jahrbuch D102, 3-
532.  
Calvez,  J.Y.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.  and  Milesi,  J.P.,  1990.  Géochronologie  du 
Protérozoïque inferieur du craton ouest africain (methode d’évaporation directe 
de  zircons  isolés).  13e  Réunion  des  Sciences  de  la  Terre,  Grenoble,  France;  in 
Milési,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Ledru,  P.,  Dommanget,  A.,  Quedraogo,  M.F., 
Marcoux,  E.,  Prost,  A.,  Vinchon,  C.,  Sylvain,  J.P.,  Johan,  V.,  Tegyey,  M., 
Calvez, J.Y., and Lagny, P., 1989. Les minéralisations aurifères de l’Afrique de 
l’Ouest  et  leurs  relations  avec  l’évolution  lithostructurale  au  Protérozoïque 
inférieur. Chronique de la Recherche Minière 497, 3-98. 
218

--- Page 228 ---
Compston, W., Williams, I.S., and Meyer, C., 1984. U–Pb geochronology of zircons 
from lunar breccia 73217 using a sensitive high mass-resolution ion microprobe. 
Journal of Geophysical Research 89, B252–B534. 
Dabo,  M.,  and  Aïfa,  T.,  2010.  Structural  styles  and  tectonic  evolution  of  the  Kolia-
Boboti sedimentary Basin, Kédougou-Kéniéba inlier, eastern Senegal. Comptes 
Rendus Geoscience 342, 796-805. 
Dabo,  M.,  and  Aïfa,  T.,  2011.  Late  Eburnean  deformation  in  the  Kolia-Boboti 
sedimentary basin, Kédougou-Kéniéba Inlier, Senegal. Journal of African Earth 
Sciences 60, 106-116. 
Davidson, J., Turner, S., and Plank, T., 2013. Dy/Dy*: Variations arising from mantle 
sources and petrogenetic processes. Journal of Petrology 54, 525-537.  
Debat,  P.,  Diallo,  D.P.,  Ngom,  P.M.,  Rollet,  M.,  and  Seyler,  M.,  1984.  La  série  de 
Mako  dans  ses  parties  centrale  et  méridionale  (Sénégal  Oriental,  Afrique  de 
l'Ouest).  Précisions  sur  l'évolution  de  la  série  volcano-sédimentaire  et  données 
géochimiques  préliminaires  sur  les  formations  magmatiques  post-tectoniques. 
Journal of African Earth Sciences 2, 71-79. 
Defant, M.J., and Drummond, M.S., 1990. Derivation of some modern arc magmas by 
melting of young subducted lithosphere. Nature 347, 662-665.  
De  Paolo,  D.J.,  1981.  Trace  element  and  isotopic  effects  of  combined  wall-rock 
assimilation and fractional crystallisation. Earth and Planetory Scienc Letters 53, 
p. 189-202. 
Dia, A., Van Schmus, W.R., and Kröner, A., 1997. Isotopic constraints on the age and 
formation of a Palaeoproterozoic volcanic arc complex in the Kédougou Inlier, 
eastern Senegal, West Africa. Journal of African Earth Sciences 24, 197-213. 
Dia,  A.,  1988.  Caractères  et  signification  des  complexes  magmatiques  et 
métamorphiques du secteur de Sandikounda-Laminia (Nord de la boutonnière de 
Kédougou, Est du Sénégal): un modèle géodynamique du Birimien de l'Afrique 
de l'Ouest. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Université de Dakar, Sénégal, 350 p. 
Diallo,  D.P.,  2001.  Paleovolcanism  in  the  western  border  of  the  Paleoproterozoic 
Kédougou inlier, eastern Senegal: geodynamic implications. Journal of African 
Earth Sciences 32, 919-940. 
Diene,  M.,  Gueye,  M.,  Diallo,  D.P.,  and  Dia,  A.,  2012.  Structural  evolution  of  a 
Precambrian Segment: example of the Paleoproterozoic formations of the Mako 
219

--- Page 229 ---
belt (eastern Senegal, West Africa). International Journal of Geosciences 3, 153-
165. 
Dioh, E., Béziat, D., Debat, P., Grégoire, M., and Ngom, P.M., 2006. Diversity of the 
Palaeoproterozoic  granitoids  of 
the  Kédougou 
inlier  (eastern  Senegal): 
Petrographical  and  geochemical  constraints.  Journal  of  African  Earth  Sciences 
44, 351-371. 
Doumbia, S., Pouclet, A., Kouamelan, A., Peucat, J.J., Vidal, M., and Delor, C., 1998. 
Petrogenesis  of  juvenile-type  Birimian  (Paleoproterozoic)  granitoids  in  Central 
Côte-d'Ivoire,  West  Africa:  geochemistry  and  geochronology.  Precambrian 
Research 87, 33-63. 
Egal,  E.,  Thiéblemont,  D.,  Lahondère,  D.,  Guerrot,  C.,  Costea,  C.A.,  Iliescu,  D., 
Delor, C., Goujou, J.C., Lafon, J.M., Tegyey, M., Diaby, S., and Kolié, P., 2002. 
Late  Eburnean  granitization  and  tectonics  along  the  western  and  northwestern 
margin  of  the  Archean  Kénéma–Man  domain  (Guinea,  West  African  Craton). 
Precambrian Research 117, 57-84. 
Foley,  S.F.,  and  Wheller,  G.E.,  1990.  Parallels 
in 
the  origin  of 
the 
geochemicalsignatures  of  island  arc  volcanics  and  continental  potassic  igneous 
rocks: the role of residual titanites. Chemical Geology 85, p. 1-18. 
Frost,  B.R.,  Barnes,  C.G.,  Collins,  W.J.,  Arculus,  R.J.,  Ellis,  D.J.,  and  Frost,  C.D., 
2001.  A  geochemical  classification  for  granitic  rocks.  Journal  of  Petrology  42, 
2033-2048. 
Frost, B.R., and Lindsley, D.H., 1991. Occurrence of iron-titanium oxides in igneous 
rocks. Reviews in mineralogy and geochemistry 25, 433-468.  
Ganne,  J.,  De  Andrade,  V.,  Weinberg,  R.F.,  Vidal,  O.,  Dubacq,  B.,  Kagambega,  N., 
Naba,  S.,  Baratoux,  L.,  Jessell,  M.,  and  Allibon,  J.,  2011.  Modern-style  plate 
subduction  preserved  in  the  Palaeoproterozoic  West  African  craton.  Nature 
geoscience 5, 60-65. 
Gill, J.B., 1981. Orogenic andesites and plate tectonics. Springer, Berlin, 390 p. 
Gueye,  M.,  Ngom,  P.M.,  Diène,  M.,  Thiam,  Y.,  Siegesmund,  S.,  Wemmer,  K.,  and 
Pawlig,  S.,  2008.  Intrusive  rocks  and  tectono-metamorphic  evolution  of  the 
Mako Paleoproterozoic belt (Eastern Senegal, West Africa). Journal of African 
Earth Sciences 50, 88-110. 
220

--- Page 230 ---
Gueye,  M.,  Siegesmund,  S.,  Wemmer,  K.,  Pawlig,  S.,  Drobe,  M.,  Nolte,  N.,  and 
Layer,  P.,  2007.  New  evidence  for  an  early  Birimian  evolution  in  the  West 
African  Craton:  An  example  from  the  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier,  southeast 
Senegal. South African Journal of Geology 110, 511-534. 
Hawkesworth,  C.J.,  and  Kemp,  A.I.S.,  2006.  The  differentiation  and  rates  of 
generation of the continental crust. Chemical Geology 226, 134-143. 
Hein,  K.A.A.,  Matsheka,  I.R.,  Bruguier,  O.,  Masurel,  Q.,  Bosch,  D.,  Caby,  R.,  and 
Monié, P., 2015. The Yatela gold deposit: 2 billion years in the making. Journal 
of African Earth Sciences, doi: 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2015.07.017 
Hein,  K.A.A.,  2010.  Succession  of  structural  events  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt 
(Burkina  Faso):  Implications  for  West  African  tectonics.  Journal  of  African 
Earth Sciences 56, 83-94. 
Hirdes, W., and Davis, D.W., 2002. U–Pb Geochronology of Paleoproterozoic Rocks 
in  the  Southern  Part  of  the  Kedougou-Kéniéba  Inlier,  Senegal,  West  Africa: 
Evidence for Diachronous Accretionary Development of the Eburnean Province. 
Precambrian Research 118, 83-99. 
John, T., Klemd, R., Hirdes, W., and Loh, G., 1999. The metamorphic evolution of the 
Paleoproterozoic  (Birimian)  volcanic  Ashanti  belt  (Ghana  West  Africa). 
Precambrian Research 98, 11–30. 
Kalsbeek, F., Frei, D., and Affaton, P., 2008. Constraints on provenance, stratigraphic 
correlation and structural context of the Volta basin, Ghana, from detrital zircon 
geochronology: an Amazonian connection? Sedimentary Geology 212, 86-95 
Kouamelan,  A.N.,  Delor,  C.,  and  Peucat,  J.J.,  1996.  Geochronological  evidence  for 
reworking  of  Archean  terrains  during  the  early  Proterozoic  (2.1  Ga)  in  the 
western Côte d’Ivoire (Man Rise, West African Craton). Precambrian Research 
86, 177–199. 
Lahondère, D., Thiéblemont, D., Tegyey, M., Guerrot, C., and Diabaté, B., 2002. First 
evidence  of  early  Birimian  (2.21  Ga)  volcanic  activity  in  Upper  Guinea:  The 
volcanics  and  associated  rocks  of  the  Niani  suite.  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences 35, 417–431. 
Lambert-Smith, J., Lawrence, D.M., Müller, W., Treloar, P.J., in press. Paleotectonic 
setting of the eastern Kédougou-Kénieba inlier, West Africa: new insights from 
221

--- Page 231 ---
igneous  trace  element  geochemistry  and  U-Pb  zircon  ages.  Precambrian 
Research. 
Lambert-Smith, J., 2014, The geology, structure and metallogenesis of the world class 
Loulo-Bambadji  Au  district  in  Mali  and  Senegal,  West  Africa.  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Kingston University London, U.K., 346 p. 
Lawrence, D.M., Treloar, P.J., Rankin, A.H., Boyce, A., and Harbidge, P., 2013b. A 
Fluid  Inclusion  and  Stable  Isotope  Study  at  the  Loulo  Mining  District,  Mali, 
West Africa: Implications for Multifluid Sources in the Generation of Orogenic 
Gold Deposits. Economic Geology 108, 229-257. 
Lawrence,  D.M.,  Treloar,  P.J.,  Rankin,  A.H.,  Harbidge,  P.,  and  Holliday,  J.,  2013a. 
The Geology and Mineralogy of the Loulo Mining District, Mali, West Africa: 
Evidence  for  Two  Distinct  Styles  of  Orogenic  Gold  Mineralization.  Economic 
Geology 108, 199-227. 
Leake, M.H., 1992. The petrogenesis and structural evolution of the early Proterozoic 
Fettekro greenstone belt, Dabakala region, NE Côte d'Ivoire. Unpublished Ph.D. 
Thesis, Portsmouth, U.K., 315 p. 
Ledru,  P.,  Pons,  J.,  Milesi,  J.P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  and  Johan,  V.,  1991.  Transcurrent 
tectonics  and  polycyclic  evolution  in  the  Lower  proterozoic  of  Senegal-Mali. 
Precambrian Research  50, 337-354. 
Liégeois, J.P., Claessens, W., Camara, D., and Klerkx, J., 1991. Short-lived Eburnian 
orogeny in southern Mali. Geology, tectonics, U-Pb and Rb-Sr geochronology. 
Precambrian Research 50, 111-136. 
Loucks,  2014.  Distinctive  composition  of  copper-forming  arc  magmas.  Australian 
Journal of Earth Sciences: an international geoscience journal of the geological 
society of Australia 61, 5-16. 
Ludwig,  K.R.,  2009.  Squid  2.50,  A  User’s  Manual:  Unpublished  report  by  Berkeley 
Geochronology Centre, California, USA, 95 p. 
Ludwig,  K.R.,  2003.  Isoplot  3.0;  a  geochronological  toolkit  for  Microsoft  Excel: 
Berkeley Geochronology Centre Special Publication 4, 70 p. 
Martin,  H.,  Smithies,  R.H.,  Rapp,  R.,  Moyen,  J.F.,  and  Champion,  D.,  2005.  An 
overview  of  adakite,  tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite  (TTG)  and  sanukitoid: 
relationships and some implications for crustal evolution. Lithos 79, 1-24.  
222

--- Page 232 ---
Masurel,  Q.,  Thébaud,  N.,  Miller,  J.,  Ulrich,  S.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  Cameron,  G.,  Béziat, 
D.,  Bruguier,  O.,  and  Davis,  J.A.,  in  press  a.  Sadiola  Hill:  a  world-class  gold 
deposit  in  Mali,  West  Africa.  Economic  Geology  –  Special  Issue  on  the  West 
African Craton. 
Masurel, Q., Thébaud, N., Miller, J., Ulrich, S., Roberts, M.P., and Béziat, D., in press 
b.  The  Alamoutala  carbonate-hosted  gold  deposit,  Kédougou-Kénieba  inlier, 
West Africa. Economic Geology – Special Issue on the West African Craton. 
Masurel, Q., Miller, J., Hein, K.A.A., Hanssen, E., Thébaud, N., Ulrich, S., Kaisin, J., 
and Tessougue, S., in press c. The Yatela gold deposit in Mali: the final product 
of  a  long-lived  history  of  hydrothermal  alteration  and  weathering.  Journal  of 
African Earth Sciences.  
McCuaig, T.C., Beresford, S., and Hronsky, J., 2010. Translating the mineral systems 
approach  into  an  effective  exploraiton  targeting  system.  Ore  Geology  reviews 
38, 128-138. 
McFarlane, C.R.M., Mavrogenes, J., Lentz, D., King, K., Allibone, A., and Holcombe, 
R.,  2011.  Geology  and  Intrusion-Related  Affinity  of  the  Morila  Gold  Mine, 
Southeast Mali. Economic Geology 106, 727-750. 
Moyen, J.F., and Martin, H., 2012. Forty years of TTG research. Lithos 148, 312-336.  
Milési, J.P., Ledru, P., Feybesse, J.L., Dommanget, A., and Marcoux, E., 1992. Early 
Proterozoic  ore  deposits  and  tectonics  of  the  Birimian  orogenic  belt,  West 
Africa. Precambrian Research 58, 305-344. 
Nasdala,  L.,  Hofmeister,  W.,  Norberg,  N.,  Martinson,  J.  M.,  Corfu,  F.,  Dörr,  W., 
Kamo, S.L., Kennedy, A.K., Kronz, A., Reiners, P.W., Frei, D., Kosler, J., Wan, 
Y.,  Götze,  J.,  Häger,  T.,  Kröner,  A.,  and  Valley,  J.  W.,  2008.  Zircon  M257  a 
Homogeneous  Natural  Reference  Material  for  the  Ion  Microprobe  U-Pb 
Analysis of Zircon. Geostandards and Geoanalytical Research 32, 247-265. 
Ndiaye,  P.M.,  Dia,  A.,  Vialette,  Y.,  Diallo,  D.P.,  Ngom,  P.M.,  Sylla,  M.,  Wade,  S., 
and  Dioh,  E., 
1997.  Données 
pétrographiques, 
géochimiques 
et 
géochronologiques  nouvelles  sur  les  granitoïdes  du  Paléoprotérozoïque  du 
Supergroupe de Dialé-Daléma (Senégal Oriental): Implications pétrogénétiques 
et géodynamiques. Journal of African Earth Sciences 25, 193-208. 
Ngom, P.M., Cordani, U.G., Teixeira, W., and Janasi, V.A., 2009. Sr and Nd isotopic 
geochemistry of the early ultramafic–mafic rocks of the Mako bimodal volcanic 
223

--- Page 233 ---
belt of the Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier (Senegal), Arabian Journal of Geosciences 
3, 49-57. 
Oberthür,  T.,  Vetter,  U.,  Davis,  D.W.,  and  Amanor,  J.A.,  1998.  Age  constraints  on 
gold mineralization and Paleoproterozoic crustal evolution in the Ashanti belt of 
southern Ghana: Precambrian Research 89, 129-143. 
Olson,  S.F.,  Diakité,  K.,  Ott,  L.,  Guindo,  A.,  Ford,  C.R.B.,  Winer,  N.,  Hanssen,  E., 
Lay,  N.,  Bradley,  R.,  and  Pohl,  D.,  1992.  Regional  setting,  structure,  and 
descriptive  geology  of  the  middle  Proterozoic  Syama  gold  deposit,  Mali,  West 
Africa. Economic Geology 87, 310-331. 
Passchier,  C.W.,  and  Trouw,  R.A.J.,  2005.  Microtectonics.  Springer,  2d  edition,  p. 
118-123. 
Pawlig,  S.,  Gueye,  M.,  Klischies,  R.,  Schwarz,  S.,  Wemmer,  K.,  Siegesmund,  S., 
2006. Geochemical and Sr-Nd isotopic data on the Birimian of the Kedougou-
Kenieba  Inlier  (Eastern  Senegal):  Implications  on  the  Palaeoproterozoic 
evolution  of  the  West  African  Craton.  South  African  Journal  of  Geology  109, 
411-427. 
Perrouty, S., Aillères, L., Jessel, M.W., Baratoux, L., Bourassa, Y., and Crawford, B., 
2012.  Revised  Eburnean  geodynamic  evolution  of  the  gold-rich  Ashanti  belt, 
Ghana, with new field and geophysical evidence of pre-Tarkwaian deformations. 
Precambrian Research 204-205, 12-39.  
Pigois,  J.P.,  Groves,  D.I.,  Fletcher,  I.R.,  McNaughton,  N.J.,  and  Snee,  L.W.,  2003. 
Age  constraints  on  Tarkwaian  paleoplacer  and  lode-gold  formation  in  the 
Tarkwa-Damang district, SW Ghana. Mineralium Deposita 38, 695-714. 
Pouclet,  A.,  Doumbia,  S.,  and  Vidal,  M.,  2006.  Geodynamic  setting  of  the  Birimian 
volcanism  in  central  Ivory  Coast  (western  Africa)  and  its  place  in  the 
Palaeoproterozoic  evolution  of  the  Man  Shield.  Bulletin  de  la  Société 
Géologique de France 177, 105-121. 
Richards,  J.P.,  2011.  Magmatic  to  hydorthermal  metal  fluxes  in  convergent  and 
collided margins. Ore Geology Reviews 40, p. 1-26. 
Ridolfi, F., Renzulli, A., and Puerini, M., 2010. Stability and chemical equilibrium of 
amphibole  in  calc-alkaline  magmas:  an  overview,  new  thermo-barometric 
formulations  and  application  to  subduction-related  volcanoes.  Contributions  to 
Mineralogy and Petrology 160, p.45-66.  
224

--- Page 234 ---
Stacey,  J.S.,  and  Kramers,  J.D,  1975.  Approximation  of  terrestrial  lead  isotope 
evolution  by  a  two-stage  model.  Earth  and  Planetary  Science  Letters  26,  207–
221. 
Stern,  R.A.,  Bodorkos,  S.,  Kamo,  S.L.,  Hickman,  A.H.,  and  Corfu,  F.,  2009. 
Measurement  of  SIMS  instrumental  mass  fractionation  of  Pb  isotopes  during 
zircon dating: Geostandards and Geoanalytical Research 33, 145–168. 
Stern, R.A., 2001. A new isotopic and trace-element standard for the ion microprobe: 
preliminary  thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry  (TIMS)  U–Pb  and  electron-
microprobe  data.  Geological  Survey  of  Canada,  Radiogenic  Age  and  Isotopic 
Studies, Report 14, Current Research 2001-F1, 11 p.  
Streckeisen,  A.,  1974.  Classification  and  nomemclature  of  plutonic  rocks, 
recommendations  of  the  IUGS  subcommission  on  the  systematics  of  igneous 
rocks. Geologische Rundschau 63, 773-786.  
Schwartz, M.O., and  Melcher, F., 2004. The Falémé Iron District, Senegal. Economic 
Geology 99, 917-939. 
Sun, S.S., and McDonough, W.F., 1989. Chemical and isotopic systematics of oceanic 
basalts:  implications  for  mantle  composition  and  processes;  in  Saunders  AD, 
Norry MJ. Magmatism in ocean basins: Geological Society Special Publication 
42, 313-345.  
Sylvester, P.J., and Attoh, K., 1992. Lithostratigraphy and composition of the 2.1 Ga 
greenstone  belts  of  the  West  African  Craton  and  their  bearing  on  crustal 
evolution and the Archean-Proterozoic boundary. The Journal of Geology 100, 
377-393. 
Treloar,  P.J.,  Lawrence,  D.M.,  Senghor,  D.,  Boyce,  A.,  and  Harbidge,  P.,  2014.  The 
Massawa gold deposit, Eastern Senegal, West Africa: an orogenic gold deposit 
sourced from magmatically derived fluids? Geological Society London Special 
Publications 393, 135-160. 
Vidal, M., Gumiaux, C., Cagnard, F., Pouclet, A., Ouattara, G., and Pichon, M., 2009. 
Evolution  of  a  Paleoproterozoic  “weak  type”  orogeny  in  the  West  African 
Craton (Ivory Coast). Tectonophysics 477, 145-159. 
Villeneuve,  M.,  2008.  Review  of  the  orogenic belts  on  the  western  side  of  the  West 
African  Craton:  the  Bassarides,  Rokelides  and  Mauritanides;  in  Ennih,  N.,  and 
225

--- Page 236 ---
Liégeois,  J.P.,  eds.,  The  boundaries  of  the  West  African  Craton.  Geological 
Society of London Special Publication 297, 169-201. 
Villeneuve, M., and  Cornée, J. J., 1994. Structure, evolution and palaeogeography of 
the  West  African  Craton  and  bordering  belts  during  the  Neoproterozoic. 
Precambrian Research 69, 307-326. 
AMIRA International, 2013. P934A - West African Exploration Initiative – Stage II,  
Final Report, p. 438-439. 
Wingate,  M.T.D.,  and  Kirkland,  C.L.,  2013.  Introduction 
to  geochronology 
information. Geological Survey of Western Australia Publication, 5 p. 
226

--- Page 237 ---
Chapter VI. Conclusions 
1. Key research outcomes 
The  concept  of  this  multi-scale  and  multidisciplinary  study  was  to  understand 
the  underpinning  factors  that  allow  integration  of  the  observed  variability  in  gold 
mineralisation (e.g., structural setting, host rocks, ore and alteration paragenesis) at both 
the  deposit-  and  camp-scale  into  a  single  coherent  framework  of  value  to  exploration. 
The key research outcomes are summarised hereafter.  
1.1.  Lithostratigraphy 
The Birimian lithostratigraphy in the region consisted of carbonates overlain by 
younger  sequences  of  detrital  sedimentary  rocks  (e.g.,  wackes,  arenites,  siltstones, 
argillites) based on way-up indicators such as fining-upwards sequences in wackes, and 
rare cross-bedding and scour-and-fill structures in arenites. The Dialé-Daléma and Kofi 
Series represent the most extensive occurrence of carbonates rocks in the West African 
Craton (Bosse, 1996). The carbonates are locally impure and characterised by abundant 
thin  (0.2-2  cm)  argillaceous-silty  interbeds.  Evidence  for  slump  folding  has  been 
observed in the Sadiola Hill and FE3 open pits. In contrast, there is a lack of evidence 
for stromatolitic facies in carbonates of the region, which would reflect shallow water 
conditions. Thus, the deposition of thick carbonate sequences probably occurred in the 
slope and plain of a syn-deformational basin in a convergent setting. Sedimentary rock 
deposition  resulted  from  a  combination  of  abundant  periplatform  and  hemipelagic 
sedimentation  and  rapid  basinal  subsidence  (e.g.,  Sami  and  James,  1994).  Available 
detrital  zircon  data  from  the  KKI  indicate  that  the  diachroneity  of  magmatic  ages  is 
reflected  in  the  provenance  of  the  sediments.  In  the  Sadiola-Yatela  district,  the 
minimum  deposition  age  for  sedimentary  rocks  of  the  Kofi  Series  correlates  with  the 
emplacement of the Alamoutala plutonic complex at c. 2100 Ma. The prevalence of this 
Bririmian-aged detritus in locally-derived sediments in the district and the KKI suggests 
227

--- Page 238 ---
that  these  older  rocks  must  have  been  uplifted,  eroded  and  transported  before  the  late 
Eburnean  tectono-thermal  event  (ca.  2090-2060  Ma).  The  change  in  sedimentary  rock 
facies deposition from carbonate sequences to flysch-type detrital sedimentary rocks in 
the  Kofi  basin  may  reflect  the  onset  of  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (i.e.  advanced 
convergence).  
1.2.  Deformation 
The Sadiola Hill gold deposit, the Yatela gold deposit and all ancillary open pits 
share a similar structural evolution. The identified deformation history is consistent with 
available  structural  data  for  the  KKI  (e.g.,  Gueye  et  al.,  2008;  Dabo  and  Aïfa,  2010; 
Diene et al, 2012; Lawrence et al., 2013a; Treloar et al., 2014). At least two episodes of 
folding  have  been  identified  in  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region.  Early  F1  folds  are 
disharmonic  with  recumbent  to  inclined  fold  hinges.  These  folds  are  NNW-  to  N-
trending,  gently  south-dipping  (10°-30°),  and  associated  with  a  weak  to  strong  axial-
planar  cleavage  (S1).  Fold  geometry  and  lineation  data  associated  with  this  early 
deformation  event  (D1s)  are  consistent  with  WSW-ENE-directed  to  E-W-directed 
shortening.  These  early  F1  folds  are  refolded  by  F2  disharmonic  folds  associated  with 
upright  to  inclined  fold  hinges.  The  F2  folds  are  associated  with  a  015º/75ºE  (e.g. 
Sadiola Hill, Tambali, Alamoutala) to 035º/75ºE (e.g. FE3, FE4) axial-planar cleavage 
(S2)  indicative  of  a  WNW  fold  vergence.  Fold  axes  and  intersection  lineations  plunge 
gently (15-30°) to the SSW or NNE. A number of NNE-trending thrusts and high-angle 
reverse  faults  are  closely  associated  with  these  F2  folds.  Fold  and  fault  geometry,  and 
lineation  data  associated  with  this  second  deformation  event  (D2s)  are  consistent  with 
NW-SE directed shortening. The following deformation increment (D3s) marks a switch 
from a coaxial to a non-coaxial deformation regime and is associated with the strike-slip 
reactivation  of  early  accretionary  structures  (e.g.,  lithostratigraphic  interfaces,  S1, 
Sadiola  Fracture  Zone)  and  the  formation  and/or  reactivation  of  NNE-trending  sub-
vertical  shear  zones.  Fault  geometries  and  lineation  data  associated  with  the  third 
deformation event (D3s) are consistent with NNW-SSE-directed shortening. The D2s and 
D3s events mark the principal imprint of the Eburnean orogeny in the region and were 
responsible for the formation of map-scale structures. The D2s and D3s events may relate 
228

--- Page 239 ---
to  the  evolution  of  a  regional  system  accommodating  oblique  convergence  (i.e. 
transpressive regime) during the Eburnean orogeny (ca. 2115-2060 Ma). The Senegal-
Mali  Shear  Zone  is  an  anastomosing  fault  network  that  is  interpreted  to  have  formed 
during D2 as a transpressional fault.  
1.3.  Metamorphism 
No evidence for large-scale amphibolite-facies metamorphic conditions could be 
identified in the region. In contrast, the country rocks exhibit regional greenschist-facies 
mineral  assemblages 
(e.g.,  biotite,  chlorite,  muscovite,  quartz,  K-feldspar). 
Amphibolite-facies  metamorphic  conditions  (e.g.,  garnet-pyroxene-actinolite-tremolite 
mineral assemblage) are restricted to contact aureoles surrounding Eburnean granitoids. 
All  gold  deposits  of  the  district  are  unmetamorphosed.  Regional  peak  metamorphism 
pre-dated  the  late  Eburnean  tectono-magmatic  event  that  occurred  between  2090  and 
2060 Ma. 
1.4.  Magmatism 
The emplacement of most exposed granitoids in the Sadiola-Yatela region took 
place within a short time span between ca. 2115 and 2060 Ma, which is the best time 
estimate  for  the  Eburnean  orogeny  in  the  KKI.  The  evolution  from  calc-alkaline 
metaluminous  hornblende-granodiorite  plutons  (ca.  2120-2080  Ma) 
to  evolved 
peraluminous  monzogranites  (ca.  2080-2060  Ma)  is  similar  to  that  reported  for 
Eburnean  granitoids  elsewhere  in  the  KKI  (e.g.,  Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002;  Dioh  et  al., 
2006; Gueye et al., 2008). The Sadiola volcanic rocks formed at 2118 ± 9 Ma and are 
significantly  younger  than  bimodal  volcanic  rocks  in  the  Mako  belt  (dated  between 
2195 ± 11 and 2158 ± 8 Ma, Dia, 1988, Dia et al., 1997). The 2071 ± 5 Ma and 2066 ± 
8  Ma  ages  for  magmatic  crystallisation  of  the  peraluminous  biotite-granites  in  the 
Sadiola Hill deposit area are the youngest plutonic ages so far reported from the Baoulé-
Mossi  domain.  These  young  ages  support  the  hypothesis  that  the  Eburnean  tectono-
thermal  event  affected  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  diachronously  from  SE  to  NW  (e.g., 
Hirdes and Davis, 2002). 
229

--- Page 240 ---
1.5.  Gold mineralisation 
Gold  mineralisation  is  largely  hosted  by  metacarbonates  in  the  district  (e.g., 
Sadiola  Hill,  Alamoutala,  Yatela,  FE3)  but  also  occurs  in  detrital  metasedimentary 
rocks (e.g., Tambali, FE4, KW18) and plutonic rocks (e.g., Alamoutala, Sadiola Hill). 
The 
late-Eburnean  sinistral  reactivation  of  early  accretionary  structures  (e.g., 
lithostratigraphic interfaces, S1, Sadiola Fracture Zone) and coupling/linkage with steep 
NNE-trending  shears  was  critical  to  ore  location  and  geometry.  Lithological  contacts 
with  contrasting  competency  properties  and  low  mean  stress  areas  surrounding  rigid 
granitoid bodies were critical to hydrothermal fluid flow focussing. The similar relative 
timing  and  structural  setting  between  gold  deposits  of  the  Sadiola-Yatela  district  and 
other deposits of the KKI (e.g., Loulo, Lawrence et al., 2013a; Massawa, Treloar et al., 
2014)  indicates  that  gold  mineralisation  in  the  region  occurred  during  a  period  of 
transcurrent  tectonics  (D3),  after  the  cessation  of  regional  contractional  deformation 
(D1-D2).  Orogenic  gold  mineralisation  in  the  Sadiola-Yatela  region  is  constrained  to 
have occurred younger than 2083 ± 7 Ma. For comparison, the orogenic overprint at the 
Morila gold deposit in southern Mali is constrained to have occurred at 2074 ± 14 Ma 
(hydrothermal  titanite,  McFarlane  et  al.,  2011).  In  addition  to  primary  orogenic  gold 
mineralisation, prospectivity in the region is increased due to the exploration potential 
for  Yatela-style  orebodies.  Such  orebodies  formed  by  residual  and  supergene  gold 
enrichment processes associated with the development of a deep weathering profile over 
carbonate host rocks.  
1.6.  Hydrothermal alteration 
Although  gold  deposits  of  the  district  share  equivalent  structural  setting  and 
relative gold timing, the diversity in ore paragenesis, nature and chemistry of wall-rock 
alteration recognised over the camp points toward three distinct styles of mineralisation 
typified by the Sadiola Hill, the Alamoutala, and the Yatela gold deposits (Table 1). The 
typical  gold-related  hydrothermal  alteration  assemblage  in  the  district  is  defined  as 
biotite  +  calcite-dolomite  +  quartz  ±  actinolite-tremolite  ±  muscovite  ±  tourmaline  ± 
pyrite-arsenopyrite-pyrrhotite. One difficulty in interpreting gold deposits of the district 
230

--- Page 241 ---
is to reconcile the thermal disequilibrium between country rocks at regional greenschist-
facies conditions and the higher temperature of the ore-related hydrothermal alteration 
paragenesis  with  characteristics  of  orogenic  gold  deposits  (e.g.,  Groves  et  al.,  1998; 
Goldfarb  et  al.,  2001;  Groves  et  al.,  2003;  Goldfarb  et  al.,  2005).  Such  geological 
feature  alone  is  not  diagnostic  of  a  magmatic  fluid  source  because  it  can  reflect  the 
interaction  of  a  fluid  from  any  source  with  reactive  country  rocks  (i.e.  impure 
limestone) at a temperature high enough to stabilise biotite (e.g., Meinert et al., 2005). 
The identified thermal disequilibrium is suggested to represent a transient thermal effect 
associated  with  syn-kinematic  igneous  activity  in  the  region  at  the  time  of 
mineralisation  (i.e.  late  Eburnean  tectono-thermal  event).  The  contrasted  primary  ore 
paragenesis identified in the various gold deposits of the district may reflect host rock 
dependency,  and/or  a  spatial  zoning  with  respect  to  the  Senegal-Mali  Shear  Zone, 
and/or ore deposition at distinct crustal levels.  
231

--- Page 242 ---
232

--- Page 243 ---
2. Implications for exploration 
In November 2013, John Miller, Nicolas Thébaud, and the candidate conducted 
a targeting workshop on the Sadiola mine site with SEMOS personnel and AngloGold 
Ashanti  brownfield  exploration  group.  The  targeting  session  used  a  mineral  system 
approach  (e.g.,  McCuaig  and  Beresford,  2009;  McCuaig  et  al.,  2010;  McCuaig  and 
Hronsky,  2014)  in  order  to  identify  and  rank  targets  based  on  research  data  and 
extensive  in-house  knowledge.  The  mineral  system  approach  relies  on  the  breakup  of 
the  mineralising  process  into  a  series  of  base  critical  processes  that  can  be  treated  as 
independent variables. These range from a primary fluid source region, an active fluid 
pathway,  and  at  the  deposit-scale  a  fluid  sink  related  to  a  physical  throttle  and/or  a 
chemical  trap.  This  approach  presents  significant  advantages  over  the  deposit  model 
approach  or  empirical  exploration  approaches,  which  are  traditionally  used.  These 
advantages are that it has a basis in probability theory and is permissive enough to allow 
for  the  discovery  of  a  new  style  of  deposit,  rather  than  just  analogues  of  what  have 
already  been  found.  During  that  exercise,  a  refined  regional  geological  map  that  used 
available  geophysical  data  sets  (e.g.,  geophysics,  soil/termite  geochemistry,  outcrop 
mapping data) was produced. In addition, a total of 31 targets were generated including 
some unexplored and untested to date. The considered information and status of follow-
up investigations remain confidential to date.  
233

--- Page 244 ---
3. Future work 
Despite  the  work  undertaken  by  the  candidate,  a  number  of  questions  remain 
unanswered, some of which are directly relevant to exploration targeting:  
3.1.  Source of fluids and metals 
Recent  research  suggests  that  the  diversity  in  mineralisation  styles  and  ore 
paragenesis  expressed  in  the  KKI  result  from  a  dynamic  hydrothermal  system  that 
sourced fluids and metals from both metamorphic and magmatic reservoirs (Lawrence 
et al., 2013a, b; Treloar et al., 2014). The collection and interpretation of fluid inclusion 
and  stable  isotope  data  is  critical  to  establishing  an  ore  genetic  model  for  the  gold 
deposits of the Sadiola-Yatela district. It would also be interesting to see how well the 
orogenic gold paradigm (Groves et al., 1998; Goldfarb et al., 2001; Groves et al., 2003; 
Goldfarb et al., 2005) translate to accretionary terranes of the West African Craton.  
3.2.  Timing of regional orogenic gold mineralisation  
The relative timing of gold mineralisation is well constrained with respect to the 
structural  evolution  of  the  KKI.  No  absolute  ages  for  the  region-wide  orogenic  gold 
mineralisation,  however,  have  yet  been  reported.  Such  data  would  allow  regional 
correlations  to  be  made,  which  in  turn  could  provide  critical  information  in  terms  of 
geological  development  of  the  West  African  Craton.  The  2028  ±  10  Ma  age  for  gold 
mineralisation at Gara in the Loulo district reported by Vielreicher (U-Pb on xenotime 
and monazite, 2006) is incompatible with the proposed tectonic evolution of the KKI. 
Such  young  age  may  relate  to  cooling  paths  after  the  late  Eburnean  tectono-thermal 
event. 
234

--- Page 245 ---
3.3.  Metamorphic data 
There is a lack of metamorphic data for the KKI. A study by Ganne et al. (2014) 
in  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  indicates  that  a  moderate  apparent  geothermal  gradient 
(M2:  20-30°C/km)  produced  greenschist- 
to  amphibolites-facies  metamorphic 
assemblages  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  and  is  superimposed  on  an  early  thermal 
regime  (M1:  <10-15°C/km)  that  produced  high-P  greenschist-  to  blueschist-facies 
metamorphic assemblages. The determination of P-T time paths in country rocks of the 
region would help to better understand the tectono-thermal evolution of the Kédougou-
Kénieba crust.  
3.4.  Lu-Hf isotopic studies 
In  situ  U-Pb  analyses  on  magmatic  zircons  have  allowed  the  determination  of 
crystallisation ages of representative magmatic rocks in the region but using hte Lu-Hf 
isotopic system would provide relevant information to the source rocks, distinguishing 
between a juvenile mantle-derived input and crustal reworking. The combination of U-
Pb and Lu-Hf isotopic data would provide better picture of the crustal evolution in the 
region (e.g., Griffin et al., 2007; O'Reilly et al., 2008).
