
--- Page 6 ---
Abstract 
The  regional  lithological  and  structural  mapping  completed  in  the  north-eastern  part  of 
Burkina Faso indicates that the Essakane goldfield of the West African Craton is hosted 
by  meta-volcanoclastic  and  meta-sedimentary  rocks  of  the  Birimian  sequences.  The 
sequences  are  dominated  by  meta-volcanoclastic  greywackes,  intercalated  meta-
conglomerate,  meta-sandstone-greywacke,  siltstone  and  shale.  The  sequences  have 
primary sedimentary structures preserved as compositional layering.  
The  depositional  environment  of  the  sequences  is  interpreted  to  have  occurred  in  a 
shallow  marine  continental  shelf  environment  at  a  delta  front  setting.  The  sequences 
where  subjected  to  several  phases  of  deformation  and  metamorphism.  They  have  been 
contact metamorphosed to hornblende hornfels facies during emplacement of adamellite, 
pyroxenite-gabbro, granodiorite-tonalite plutons, and dolerite dykes. 
Structural  studies  indicate  that  the  NE-trending  Markoye  fault,  which  is  the  first-order 
crustal-scale  structure,  have  undergone  at  least  two  phases  of  deformation,  D1  and  D2, 
with reactivation during the late phase of D2. D1 resulted in formation of NW-trending 
asymmetric folds and thrusts at Essakane, and the displacement along the Markoye fault 
was dextral reverse. D2 is a period of SE-NW crustal shortening that formed NE-trending 
folds,  and  NE-trending  regional  foliation.  The  NE-trending  mylonite  to  ultramylonite 
zone, pseudotachylyte veins, buck quartz-carbonate (± tourmaline) veins and quartz iron-
rich catalasite vein, and late quartz-chlorite shears formed during D2.  
D1 is interpreted to pre-date the Eburnean Orogeny, and D2 is correlated to the Eburnean 
Orogeny ~2.1 G.a. The name ‘Markoye Fault’ should be changed to Markoye Shear Zone 
(MSZ) to reflect the complex nature of the structure and tectonic history.

--- Page 7 ---
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 Preamble 
The  NE-trending  Markoye  fault  in  Burkina  Faso  is  a  first-order  crustal  scale  structure 
located in the north-eastern part of Burkina Faso, between the towns of Dori and Tambão 
by the boarder with Mali and Niger (Fig. 1). The structure has been interpreted as a major 
westerly-dipping  thrust  (Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Hottin  and  Ouedraogo,  1992).  Delfour  and 
Jeabrum (1970) in Rogers and Dong (2000) defined the structure as an east-verging thrust 
and  BHP  geologists  interpreted  the  structure  as  part  of  a  regional  dextral  strike-slip 
system.  Castaing  et  al.  (2003)  interpreted  the  same  structure  as  a  sinistral  fault  system, 
and  Milési  et  al.  (1991,  1992),  Hirdes  and  Davis  (1998),  and  Hirdes  et  al.  (1996) 
interpreted that the Markoye fault formed during the Eburnean Orogeny at 2150 to 2095 
Ma.  However  little  field  data  has  been  presented  to  quantify  the  tectonic  history  of  the 
structure and thus tectonic interpretation are contradictory. 
The  focus  of  this  research  is  the  Markoye  fault  and  its  tectonic  history.  Added  to  this, 
field studies test the possibility that the Markoye fault is a Pan African structure and that 
gold  metallogenesis  is  associated  with  late  Neo-Proterozoic  Pan  African  tectonics  (c.f. 
Liégeois  et  al.,  2003)  through  development  of  a  relative  chronology  of  structural  and 
metallogenic events. 
Since the completion of geological mapping of the West African Craton in the 1980s by 
the BRGM, geological mapping has been focused in areas with potential mineral deposits 
including  gold  deposits  in  the  Ashanti  Belt  and  Tarkwa  Basin  in  Ghana  (Milési  et  al., 
1989, 1991; Feybesse et al., 2006). In Burkina Faso studies completed by Feybesse et al. 
(1990), Lompo et al. (1991, Béziat et al. (2000) and Hein et al. (2004) have focused on 
the Boromo-Goren Greenstone belt and associated gold mineralization. However, little or 
no research has been undertaken to develop an understanding of first order crustal scale 
structures and their relationship to gold mineralization in the Essakane goldfield. This is 
the purpose of this report.

--- Page 8 ---
1.2 Location and physiography 
The area of study is located ±250 km NE of the capital city, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso 
(Fig.  1).  Burkina  Faso  is  a  landlocked  country  in  West  Africa.  The  neighbouring 
countries  include  Mali,  Niger,  Benin,  Togo,  Ghana  and  Côte  d`Ivoire.  The  official 
language is French.  Other languages, local languages include Mooré and Dioula. Islam is 
the  dominate  religion  with  more  than  half  of  the  country’s  population  being  Muslim,  a 
small group being Christian, with the remainder practicing indigenous African religions. 
The land surface is defined by alluvial plains, low hills, and sand dunes of the Sahara in 
the north. The area of study is situated in the margin of the Sahara desert or Sahel region. 
In  this  region  more  than  60%  of  the  land  surface  is  covered  by  sand.  The  dominate 
vegetation is short-tall grass, with less than 10% cover due to trees.  
The  climate  is  variable  between  two  seasons,  the  wet  (rainy)  and  dry  season.  The 
harmattan wind (hot and dry) blows from the Sahara desert during the dry season. During 
this  period  the  day  temperatures  can  peak  at  45ºC  with  night  temperatures  averaging 
30ºC. The harmattan winds collect dust particles from the Sahara desert and, in so doing, 
considerably reduces visibility during the harmattan season. Consequently field work for 
this project was completed at the beginning of the dry season before the harmattan wind 
started. 
1.3 Aims and objectives  
The aims of this project are: 
- To establish the relative timing of structural events for the Markoye fault.  
- To understand the tectonic history. 
- To establish the spatial and temporal relationship of the various geological features in 
the region. 
- If possible, to fingerprint the timing of gold metallogenesis.

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1. Simplified geological map of the West African Craton after Thièblemont et al. (2004), and the geological map of the study area modified 
after  Castaing  et  al. 
(2003).  The  study  area 
is  situated 
in 
the  Palaeoproterozoic  Baoule-Mossi  Domain 
in  Burkina  Faso.

--- Page 10 ---
Chapter 2: Regional Geology 
2.1 Preamble 
The  West  African  Craton  is  composed  of an Archaean and Palaeoproterozoic basement 
that  is  divided  into  the  Reguibat  Rise  in  the  north  and  the  Leo-Man  Rise  in  the  south 
(Thiéblemont et al., 2004). These two are separated by the Taoudeni basin, which is of 
upper  Proterozoic  to  Devonian  age  (Fig.  1).  The  Leo-Man  Rise  is  composed  of  two 
domains, the Kénéma-Man domain in the south west and the Baoule-Mossi domain in the 
east (Feybesse et al., 2006). The area of study is situated within the Leo-Man Rise in the 
Palaeoproterozoic  Baoule-Mossi  domain.  The  Kénéma-Man  domain  is  Archaean  in  age 
and dated at 3542-3535 Ma (U-Pb zircon, Thiéblemont et al., 2001, 2004). The Baoule-
Mossi domain is Palaeoproterozoic in age and consists of Birimian sequences that where 
accreted  at  around  2100  Ma  during  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (Milési  et  al.,  1991,  1992; 
Boher  et  al.,  1992).  The  syn-tectonic  emplacement  of  granitoids  during  accretion 
occurred  at  around  2190-2108  Ma  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (Hirdes  and  Davis, 
2002).  The  Tarkwa  Group  which  unconformably  overlies  the  Birimian  sequences  is 
regarded  by  some  as  the  erosional  product  of  the  Birimian  sequences  and  granitoids 
(Hastings, 1982; Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1992; Castaing et al., 2003).  
2.2 Stratigraphy 
The area of study is situated in the NE of Burkina Faso. The overall stratigraphy of the 
eastern part of Burkina Faso is established by the Palaeoproterozoic basement. The NE-
trending  Birimian  meta-sedimentary  and  meta-volcanic  sequences  (2238-2170  Ma) 
unconformably  overlie  the  basement.  The  NE-trending  Tarkwa  Group  (2150-2130  Ma) 
meta-sedimentary  sequence  overlie  the  Birimian  sequences  and  they  are  intruded  by 
Eburnean granitoids (2150-2095 Ma) (Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1991; Bossière et 
al., 1996; Castaing et al 2003; Naba et al., 2004). Both sequences were deformed during 
the  Eburnean  Orogeny  at  2100  Ma  -  2000  Ma  (Milési  et  al.,  1991,  1992;  Ledru  et  al 
1994).  There  is  a  school  of  thought  that  acknowledges  a  well  established  unconformity 
4

--- Page 11 ---
between the West African Craton and the Birimian sequences (Milési et al., 1989; Davis 
et  al.,  1994;  Feybesse  and  Milési.,  1994).  Furthermore  Milési  et  al.  (1992)  determined 
that an unconformity exists between the lower and the upper Birimian series in the type 
locality in the Goren Greenstone Belt. However Hein et al. (2004) demonstrated that the 
discordance  was  structural  and  that  the  lower  and  upper  Birimian  series  are,  instead, 
interbedded.  An  unconformity  also  exists  between  the  Birimian  sequences  and  the 
overlying Tarkwa Group sequences (Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1992; Castaing et 
al., 2003). 
2.3 Birimian sequences 
Junner (1935; 1940) in Leube et al. (1990) divided the stratigraphy of the Birimian into 
two  parts.  The  lower  Birimian  series  (B1)  is  predominantly  sedimentary  in  origin  and 
includes  dacitic/rhyodacitic  meta-volcanoclastic  sediments,  meta-greywacke  with 
intercalated  black  meta-siltstone  and  manganiferous  chert,  argillite,  shale  and  chemical 
meta-sedimentary  rocks  (Feybesse  et  al.,  1990;  Leube  et  al.,  1990;  Hirdes  et  al.,  1996; 
Milési  et  al.,  1991,  1992).  The  upper  Birimian  series  (B2)  consists  of  metamorphosed 
basic  (tholeiites  pillow  lavas  and  basalts)  and  intermediate  lavas  and  pyroclastic  rocks 
(Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1991, 1992; Hirdes et al., 1996; Naba et al., 2004). The 
layout  of  the  Birimian  stratigraphy  is  the  subject  of  controversy.  Hirdes  et  al.  (1996) 
considered B2 to be younger than B1, however, Milési et al. (1991, 1992) and Feybesse 
and  Milési  (1994)  considered  B1  to  be  younger  than  B2.  In  contrast  Hein  et  al.  (2004) 
established  that  meta-volcanic  and  meta-pyroclastic  units  are  interbedded  with  meta-
sedimentary rocks throughout the type locality in the Goren Greenstone Belt, and thus the 
stratigraphy of the NE of Burkina Faso may need revision. 
2.4 Intrusive complexes 
During  the  polycyclic  Eburnean  Orogeny  numerous  calc-alkaline  plutons  intruded  the 
Palaeoproterozoic sequences (Pawlig et al., 2006) including tonalite (TTG), granodiorite, 
diorite  and  meta-diorite,  and  these  are  collectively  called  Eburnean  granitoids  (Pons  et 
5

--- Page 12 ---
al., 1995; Naba et al., 2004; Pawlig et al., 2006). The tecto-magmatic event related to the 
intrusion of the granitoids is dated at 2200 Ma – 2070 Ma (U-Pb dating) (Liégois et al., 
1991).  The  granitoids  cover  50-70%  of  the  Palaeoproterozoic  basement  of  West  Africa 
(Milési et al., 1989; Naba et al., 2004). Two emplacement events have been established 
(Castaing  et  al.,  2003;  Naba  et  al.,  2004).  A  TTG  Suite  which  is  composed  of 
granodiorite,  tonalite  and  quartz-diorite  was  emplaced  between  2210  and  2160  Ma 
(Castaing  et  al.,  2003).  The  tonalite  suite  intrudes  and  contact  metamorphoses  the 
Birimian  sequences,  and  is  banded  (layered)  and  foliated  in  places  (Hein  et  al.,  2004; 
Naba et al., 2004). A granite suite which is localized along shear zones, intrudes both the 
Birimian and the TTG suite and was emplaced between 2150 and 2130 Ma (Castaing et 
al., 2003). Gabbro, meta-gabbro, diorite and trondhjemite intrusions are syn-tectonic with 
emplacement of Birimian meta-volcanic sequences (Béziat et al., 2000; Hein et al., 2004) 
and co-magmatic (Béziat et al., 2000). NE-trending dolerite dykes crosscut all Birimian, 
Tarkwa and intrusive complexes in the NE of Burkina Faso and are dated at 250±13 Ma 
(K-Ar whole rock dating) (Hottin and Ouedraogo, 1992). 
2.5 Metamorphism 
The Birimian sequences were metamorphosed during the Eburnean Orogeny with further 
metamorphism  related  to  intrusion  of  granitoids.  Metamorphic  grade  is  to  greenschist 
facies  (Milési  et  al.,  1989,  1991;  Bossière  et  al.,  1996;  Hirdes  et  al.,  1996),  with 
formation of chlorite and muscovite dominant mineral assemblages, and low to medium 
grade amphibolite facies, with hornblende and andalusite dominant mineral assemblages 
(Bossière  et  al.,  1996;  Béziat  et  al.,  2000;  Naba  et  al.,  2004)  particularly  in  the  contact 
aureole  of  granitoids  (Pawlig  et  al.,  2006).  The  Tarkwa  Group  is  metamorphosed  to 
greenschist facies with development of chlorite and sericite (Milési et al., 1989, 1991). 
2.6 Tarkwa Group 
The  Tarkwa  Group  is  defined  from  Ghana  as  clastic  meta-sedimentary  rocks  derived 
from  erosion  of  the  Birimian  sequences  (Leube  et  al.,  1990;  Milési  et  al.,  1991).  The 
6

--- Page 13 ---
Tarkwa Group unconformably overlies the Birimian sequence (Leube et al., 1990; Milési 
et al., 1992; Castaing et al., 2003) and was deformed and metamorphosed to greenschist 
facies during the Eburnean Orogeny (Milési et al., 1989, 1991). 
The Tarkwa Group has been divided into three units: the Banket series, phyllite unit and 
the meta-sandstone unit. The Banket series is further divided into the Banket quartz lithic 
meta-sandstone unit and the Banket meta-conglomerate unit (Tunks et al., 2004). Kwesie 
(1984) and Kesse (1985) in Milési et al., (1991) described the meta-conglomerate unit at  
Tarkwa  in  Ghana  as  monomictic,  consisting  of  over  90%  rounded  vein  quartz  pebbles 
and approximately 10 % schist and quartzite pebbles. The matrix is mainly composed of 
silica and black sands that are rich in heavy minerals including magnetite, ilmenite, rutile 
and  tourmaline  (Milési  et  al.,  1989,  1991;  Bossière  et  al.,  1996).  The  Tarkwa  Group 
meta-conglomerate unit hosts and has been the source for economic gold at the Tarkwa 
mine, Ghana (Milési et al., 1991). 
Bossière  et  al.  (1996)  established  that  the  metamorphosed  sequences  of  the  Tarkwa 
Group of Burkina Faso (in the study area) were different from those defined in Ghana, in 
that they contain euhedral zircons that suggest a short transportation distance. In the study 
area  the  Tarkwa  Group  meta-sedimentary  rocks  are  deformed.  Their  deformation  has 
been attributed to the formation of sinistral shears and low grade metamorphism that is 
characterised by formation of muscovite (Bossière et al., 1996; Naba et al., 2004), which 
is  similar  to  what  has  been  defined  in  Ghana  by  Milési  et  al.  (1989,  1991).  They  were 
divided into 3 main lithological units by Bossière et al. (1996), but the stratigraphic order 
was not defined. The three main units include: (1) a meta-pelite unit, (2) meta-sandstone 
unit  and  (3)  a  meta-conglomerate  unit  containing  angular  clasts  of  quartzitic  and 
micaceous lithic fragments of rhyolite, chert and schist. 
2.7 Structure  
Several regional tectono-metamorphic events are recognised in the NE of Burkina Faso. 
In  studies  conducted  by  Feybesse  et  al.  (1990),  Lompo  et  al.  (1991),  and  Hein  et  al. 
7

--- Page 14 ---
(2004)  in  the  Boromo-Goren  Greenstone  Belt,  four  deformational  events  are  currently 
recognised.  D1,  represented  by  isoclinal  folds  (F1)  which  are  synchronous  with 
development  of  foliation.  D2,  represented  by  formation  of  N,  NE  and  NW-trending 
sinistral faults that are synchronous with low-grade metamorphism. D3 is represented by 
NE-trending  dextral  or  dextral  reverse  faults,  also  synchronous  with  low-grade 
metamorphism. D3 event is associated with the development F3 folds during E-W crustal 
shortening. D4, which is represented by NW-trending Wabi-Tampelse Shear Zone which 
crosscuts the Goren Greenstone Belt is associated with development of mesoscopic folds 
(F4) during N-S crustal shortening (Hein et al., 2004). 
2.8 Markoye Fault 
The first-order crustal-scale Markoye fault is located in the NE of Burkina Faso, west of 
the  international  border  intersection  of  Burkina  Faso,  Mali  and  Niger  (Fig.1).  The  fault 
trends NE and is clearly visible in LANDSAT imagery (Fig. 2) and RTP magnetic data. 
According to Milési et al. (1989, 1992) and Castaing et al. (2003) the Markoye fault is 
the  boundary  that  separates  Eburnean  granitoids  to  the  west  from  the  Tarkwa  Group 
meta-sedimentary  units  in  the  east.  In  Milési  et  al.  (1989,  1991,  1992)  and  Hottin  and 
Ouedraogo  (1992),  the  Markoye  fault  is  recorded  as  a  westerly-dipping  thrust  but  field 
data was not presented. Unpublished structural studies completed for Goldfields Mining 
Pty, Ltd, Ore Zone Resources and BHP Billiton concluded that the Markoye fault is an 
east-verging  thrust  (Rogers  and  Dong,  2000)  and  that  it  is  a  part  of  a  regional  dextral 
strike-slip system. 
2.9 Regional metallogeny 
The West African Craton hosts many mineral deposits, for example, gold, diamond, iron, 
and  manganese,  silver,  lead  and  zinc  (Hastings,  1982;  Milési  et  al.,  1992).  Several 
deposits and deposit styles occur in the study area including; (1) The manganese deposit 
at  Tambăo  close  to  border  with  Niger  (Fig.  2),  (2)  gold  mineralization  at  Essakane, 
Gosséy, Koiréziéna, Falagountou (Fig. 2) and Sebba (Milési et al., 1992; Castaing et al., 
8

--- Page 15 ---
2003),  and  (3)  pegmatites  veins  bearing  tourmaline  plagioclase  and  topaz  crystals  near 
Tambăo. Several deposits are associated with the sulphidised brittle-ductile shear zones, 
including gold in sheeted and stockwork quartz veins, copper as malachite in buck quartz 
veins,  and  tourmaline  and  topaz  in  pegmatite  and  buck  quartz  veins  (Foster  and  Piper, 
1993; Lompo, 2001; Castaing et al., 2003). Foster and Piper (1993) have restricted gold 
mineralization of the West African Craton to the Eburnean tectonothermal event, but this 
does  not  include  gold  hosted  by  the  Tarkwa  Group  meta-sedimentary  units  in  Ghana 
(Milési  et  al.,  1991;  Feybesse  et  al.,  2006)  which  formed  after  the  Eburnean  event. 
Bossière  et  al.  (1996)  concluded  that  the  Tarkwa  Group  meta-sedimentary  units  in  the 
study area have no economic value.  
9

--- Page 16 ---
Figure  2.  Schematic  interpretation  of  LANDSAT  image,  modified  after  Hein  and 
Tshibubudze, 2007 showing locations of villages, orpaillage (             ) and traverse lines 
(     ). The villages are: Salmossi (S), Essakane (E), Tin Agadel (TA), Tin Taradat (TT), 
Markoye (M), and Gorom-Gorom (GG). The (YMC) Yacouba Mafic Complex      . 
10

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 3: Methodology 
3.1 Data collection 
In  January  2007  a  detailed  structural  mapping  project  was  conducted  in  the  study  area 
over  a  period  of  20  days,  including  days  allocated  to  logistics  and  camp  management. 
Geology  and  topographic  maps,  and  airborne  magnetic  data  were  used  to  delineate  the 
Markoye  fault.  Geographic  and  geologic  reconnaissance  studies  of  the  region  were 
conducted  before  the  actual  field  work  commenced.  Several  east-west  traverses  were 
conducted  across  the  Markoye  fault  between  Essakane  and  Tambăo  (Fig.1  and  2).  For 
each station point mapped, lithological and structural data was recorded, a photographic 
record was made, GPS position was established using UTM grid co-ordinates (WGS 84), 
and if appropriate, samples were collected for petrographic studies. 
The  data  was  captured  using  a  northern  hemisphere  compass  clinometer,  and  the 
geographic  coordinates  were  recorded  using  Garmin  Geographic  Positioning  System 
(GPS) instrument. A geological hammer was used for sampling. Digital camera was used 
for  photograph,  and  a  handlens  for  mineral  identification.  For  most  of  the  outcrops, 
stratigraphic  facing  was  established  from  primary  sedimentary  features  including  bed 
gradation,  scour  and  fill,  cross-bedding,  ripple  marks,  etc.  In  areas  of  limited  outcrop, 
with  a  cover  of  ferricrete  or  alluvium,  sub-crop  geology  mapping  was  used  to  provide 
qualitative stratigraphic data. 
Both  oriented  and  non-oriented  samples  were  collected  to  assist  with  lithological 
descriptions  and  future  micro-structural  analysis  in  2008.  Samples  where  labelled, 
described and bagged. All samples where transported to Orezone Resources main office 
in  Ouagadougou,  and  then  transported  to  Johannesburg  by  Air  France  flight.  Samples 
were  catalogued  and  submitted  to  SGS  laboratories  in  Booysens  Johannesburg  to  make 
polished  thin  sections  (PTS).  Oriented  samples  were  referenced  to  magnetic  north,  and 
marked with horizontal and vertical orientation lines.  
11

--- Page 18 ---
3.2 Data processing and interpretation 
An  Excel  (Microsoft)  spreadsheet  was  created  to  catalogue  structural  elements  and 
lithological descriptions. The spreadsheet is presented in Appendix A. Corel DRAW 9.0 
was used for drawing maps and diagrams. GEORIENT 9.2 (Holcombe, 2006) was used 
to analyse structural data. 
12

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 4: Lithologies 
4.1 Preamble 
The  lithologies  of  the  study  area  consist  of  metamorphosed  volcano-sedimentary  and 
sedimentary  sequences.  These  sequences  have  been  intruded  by  plutonic  rocks  that 
include granodiorite-tonalite, pyroxenite-gabbro, granite (adamellite) plutons and dolerite 
dykes.  The  plutons  and  dyke  have  contact  metamorphosed  the  rocks  of  the  region  to 
hornblende-hornfels facies (Fig. 2). All the lithologies in the area have been subjected to 
several phases of local-regional deformation, with development of schistosity (shearing), 
mylonite-ultra-mylonite,  cataclasite,  and  L-tectonite  (Chapter  5).  The  lithologies  are 
capped by laterite and alluvium-dune sand profile in places. 
4.2 Greywacke-Siltstone sequence 
The sequence is metamorphosed and it is magnetic in places. Sedimentary structures are 
preserved as compositional layering in the contact aureole of intrusions. Facing direction 
is east as determined from graded bedding, and scour and fill. The general orientation of 
foliation  (cleavage)  is  north-east  trending.  The  general  orientation  of  bedding  is  north-
north-east trending. Crosscutting quartz veins are generally orientated north-east. 
The  monotonous  greywacke-siltstone  sequences  at  the  Essakane  orpaillage  west  of  the 
Essakane village (Fig. 2) hosts crosscutting quartz-carbonate veins, and gold-arsenopyrite 
mineralization is hosted in the alteration zone surrounding the quartz-carbonate veins in 
competent  greywacke  sandstone  units.    The  greywacke-siltstone  sequence  has  been 
folded.  Siltstone  units  are  spotted  with  ovoid  porphyroblasts  of  cordierite  (thermally 
metamorphosed). Siltstone, greywacke, sandstone and shale layers are interbedded. Shale 
is dark-grey to black in colour, and contains a pronounced pencil cleavage. Stromatolites 
occur in siltstone-sandstone sequences (Fig. 3) south of the Gosséy trend (Fig. 2). 
13

--- Page 20 ---
West  of  the  Essakane  orpaillage  (Fig.  2)  the  lithologies  are  dominated  by  greywacke 
sandstone  that  contains  shale  fragments.  Primary  sedimentary  features  including  sand-
balls, slumps and cross-bedding are preserved as compositional layering. The pebble lag 
at the bottom of the greywacke sandstone layer is polymictic with clasts of shale (black) 
and  chert.  The  sequences  have  been  contact  metamorphosed  to  hornblende-hornfels 
facies by a mafic dyke intrusion.   
4.3 Massive volcanoclastic greywacke sequences 
Massive volcanoclastic greywacke units underlie the greywacke siltstone sequences, and 
are  predominantly  composed  of  quartz  and  feldspar  grains  in  a  fine  to  medium  grained 
matrix  (Fig.  4,  d).  Facing  is  to  the  east,  as  determined  from  cross  beds,  scour  and  fill, 
ripple  marks,  laminations,  slumps,  mud-balls,  sand-balls,  and  graded  beds  (Fig.  4,  a,  b, 
and  c).    Fuchsite  layers  (Cr-muscovite,  Navas  et  al.,  2004)  (Fig.  4,  a)  and  mud-cracks 
occur in some meta-volcanoclastic beds. The mud-cracks indicate shallow marine or tidal 
environment. 
4.4 Conglomerate 
Conglomerate units are polymictic and matrix supported. They are composed of boulders 
of  granite,  granodiorite,  gabbro,  chert,  quartz  veins,  andesite,  basalt  and  volcanoclastic 
sedimentary  rocks,  in  a  greenish,  fine  to  coarse  grained  poorly  sorted  volcanoclastic 
matrix (Fig.  5, a, and b).  The clasts are  sub-rounded  to angular  and up to 30cm in size 
(Fig. 5, a, and b). 
4.5 Laterite  
Laterite is iron-rich profile that is developed under tropical to sub-tropical condition due 
to long term exposure of rocks to the atmosphere and hydrosphere in tectonically stable 
areas  (Dequincey  et  al.,  2006).  In  an  isotopic  study  conducted  across  the  West  African 
Craton,  using  10Be  and  26Al  isotopic  depletion  ratios  of  laterite,  Brown  et  al.  (1994) 
14

--- Page 21 ---
concluded  that  in-situ  laterite  in  Burkina  Faso  formed  during  the  upper  Cretaceous  to 
Eocene. The laterite is randomly distributed in the northern part of the study area.  
4.6 Alluvial profile 
The alluvial profile in the area of study is dominated by light coloured, fine to medium 
sand  with  fragments  of  siltstone  and  quartz-vein  material.  The  alluvial  profile  covers 
most of the landscape in Burkina Faso. 
4.7 Intrusions 
4.7.1 Biotite Granite/ Adamellite  
A biotite granite/adamellite crops out west of the Markoye fault (Fig. 2). It is medium to 
coarse,  and  composed  of  millimetre-sized  crystals  of  potassium  feldspar,  quartz, 
plagioclase, biotite and hornblende in a quartz-feldspar rich groundmass (Fig. 6, a, b and 
c). Adjacent to the Markoye fault the granite is foliated and lineated. 
4.7.2 Yacouba Mafic Complex (YMC) 
The YMC is located NE of the Gosséy orpaillage (Fig. 2). It is composed of pyroxenite 
and gabbro layers. The gabbro is coarse, light coloured, and composed of large crystals of 
plagioclase, quartz and pyroxene (Fig. 7, a, b). It is NE-trending with numerous gabbro 
dykes that radiate away from the main intrusion. The dykes predominantly trend NW. 
The  pyroxenite  layer  consists  of  large  (>1cm)  pyroxene  and  olivine  crystals  in  a 
pyroxene-olivine-nepheline  groundmass  (Fig.  8,  a,  b).  The  intrusion  constites  a  mafic 
layered suite that is differentiated with gabbro-norite layer. The gabbro-norite layer hosts 
lithic xenoliths, and is crosscut by quartz veins. The contact aureole to the intrusion hosts 
spider-type veins and contraction fractures due to cooling of the intrusion. The pyroxenite 
15

--- Page 22 ---
is  crosscut  by  a  week  anastomosing  cleavage  that  is  non  penetrative.  The  cleavage 
crosscuts post-dates the emplacement of pyroxenite intrusion. 
NW-trending  pyroxenite  dykes  are  composed  entirely  of  pyroxene  crystals  and 
hornblende.  The  wall  rocks  to  these  dykes  are  contact  metamorphosed  to  hornblende-
hornfels facies. 
4.7.3 Granodiorite-Tonalite 
A granodiorite-tonalite intrusion outcrops over greater than 50% of the study area west of 
the Markoye fault between Gosséy and Tambão (Fig. 1). The granodiorite-tonalite pluton 
is  coarse  to  medium,  and  composed  of  crystals  of  plagioclase,  quartz,  hornblende  and 
biotite (Fig. 9). It is crosscut by pseudotachylyte veins west of the Markoye fault. It hosts 
elongate mafic xenoliths that trend NW and dips to the west. The hereafter referred to as 
the  Tin-Taradat  granodiorite-tonalite  (Fig.  2)  is  crosscut  by  a  pegmatite  vein.  The 
pegmatite  vein  is  ±40  cm  thick,  and  it  trends  NE.  It  is  a  plagioclase-tourmaline-topaz 
pegmatite with crystals greater than 10cm in size.  
4.7.4 Dolerite 
A series of parallel NW-trending, mafic magnetic dolerite dykes crosscut the study area. 
They are composed of plagioclase, clinopyroxene and magnetite and  commonly  exhibit 
granophyric texture in thin section. The mineralogical composition is given in Figure 10. 
The  dykes  crosscut  greywacke-siltstone  sequences  at  the  Essakane  goldfield  and  have 
contact  metamorphosed  these  sequences  to  hornblende-hornfels  facies.  The  contact 
aureole rocks of these dykes are strongly magnetic. 
16

--- Page 23 ---
Stromatolites 
Figure 3. Stromatolites in a sandstone outcrop south of Gosséy. Compass clinometer for 
scale. GPS, N 14 26 22 3 W 00 00 16 3. 
17

--- Page 24 ---
Sand ball 
Figure  4.  (a)  Contact  metamorphosed  meta-volcanoclastic  greywacke  east  of  the 
Markoye fault showing bed layering compositional and interbedded fuchsite layer. GPS, 
N 14 38 30 7 E 00 03 36 2. (b) Slump flow and sand-balls preserved in a meta-greywacke 
18

--- Page 25 ---
sequence west of Essakane. GPS, 0184836- 1587581 (c) Preserved primary sedimentary 
structure, ripple marks above the red arrow head and sour and fill texture. GPS, N 14 38 
03 3 E 00 03 32 8. The arrows indicates the facing direction (d) Photomicrograph (plane 
polarised light, X4 magnification), of meta-volcanoclastic greywacke (sample 005). The 
greywacke  is  poorly  sorted  and  contains  rock  fragments,  anhedral  quartz,  plagioclase 
grains, and isotropic minerals in a fine to medium grained quartz-feldspar-chlorite matrix. 
19

--- Page 26 ---
Figure 5. (a). The polymictic, matrix supported conglomerate unit in the study area. GPS, 
N 16 19 70 0 E 01 82 69 1 (b) Photomicrograph of the matrix of (a) under plane polarised 
light  (X4  magnification).  The  matrix  is  poorly  sorted  and  composed  of  single  and 
polycrystalline quartz, plagioclase, chlorite and fine to coarse grained rock fragments. 
20

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 6. (a) The adamellite which crops out west of the Markoye fault. GPS, N 14 36 31 
8  W  00  00  45  2.  (b)  Photomicrograph  of  adamellite.  The  adamellite  is  K-feldspar 
dominant.  Phenocrysts  of  plagioclase  in  a  quartzitic-feldspar  matrix  are  partially  re-
crystallized.  (c)  Polycrystalline  quartz  (undulating  extinction)  crystals  and  biotite  with 
few crystals of muscovite. 
21

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 7. Photomicrographs of a gabbro (X 4 magnification) under plane polarised light. 
This gabbro is composed of euhedral plagioclase, amphibole, clinopyroxene, biotite, and 
isotropic minerals (sulphides).  
22

--- Page 29 ---
Figure  8.  (a)  The  pyroxenite  layer  of  the  YMC.  GPS  N  14  30  27  7  E  00  00  16  2.  (b)  
Photomicrograph  of  crystals  of  clinopyroxene  and  nepheline  of  the  pyroxenite  layer  of 
the YMC.  
23

--- Page 30 ---
Figure  9.  Coarse  to  medium  granodiorite-tonalite,  which  is  composed  of  plagioclase, 
quartz, hornblende and biotite crystals. The nature of banding that is parallel to strike of 
the compass clinometer is not known. GPS 14 35 05 7 W 00 00 05 4. 
24

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 10. Photomicrograph of dolerite (X 4 magnification) under plane polarised light. 
This  dolerite  is  composed  of  crystals  of  plagioclase,  clinopyroxene  and  mignetite. 
Intergrowths  of  quartz  and  alkali-feldspar  (granophyric  texture)  are  common  (yellow 
rings). 
25

--- Page 32 ---
Chapter 5: Structure 
5.1 Preamble 
The Markoye fault is ~5 km wide and is NE-trending. It is a composite structure of faults, 
shears,  L-tectonites,  zones  of  mylonitisation  and  pseudotachylyte  veins.  It  hosts  an  en 
echelon  buck  quartz-carbonate  vein  array.  The  structure  has  undergone  two  phases  of 
brittle-ductile  deformation  and  at  least  two  phases  of  reactivation  are  recognised.  D1 
resulted in the development of the NW-trending asymmetric fold (F1), and the sense of 
displacement on the Markoye fault was dextral (reverse). D2 marked a period of sinistral 
(reverse)  displacement  on  the  Markoye  fault  with  refolding  of  F1  to  form  NE-trending 
folds (F2). F1 and F2 are crosscut by faults and quartz-chlorite shears associated with the 
development of quartz-carbonate veins during reactivation of the Markoye fault. 
5.2 D1 
D1 is associated with the formation of NW-trending folds (F1) that are clearly evident in 
the exploration trenches at Essakane Orpaillage (Fig. 11). An equal area projection of the 
poles to bedding exposed in the trenches in the southern part of the Essakane Orpaillage 
is  presented  in  Figure  12.  The  mean  strike  and  dip  is  343°/27°E.  Calculated  fold  axes 
plunge  2°  towards  348°.  Folds  are  upright,  open  and  asymmetric.  Beds  facing  in  both 
limbs  were  determined  from  scour  and  fill,  graded  beds,  and  laminations.  A  pervasive 
cleavage is not evident in the trenches, but this could be due to the weathered nature of 
the meta-sedimentary units.  
Rogers and Dong (2000) concluded that a series of north-east dipping thrusts also formed 
during  fold  formation.  In  summary  the  data  suggest  that  the  tectonic  transport  during 
formation of F1 and thrusts was to the SW. F1 is crosscut by stockwork, breccia quartz-
carbonate  veins.  An  east  dipping  strike-slip  fault  transects  the  anticline,  late  strike-slip 
faults are also described by Delisle (2003). 
26

--- Page 33 ---
5.3 D2 
The second deformation event (D2) is marked by the period of SE-NW crustal shortening 
during which NE-trending structures were developed. These structures include folds (F2), 
a zone of mylonite to ultra-mylonite herein referred to as Mukosi Mylonite Zone (MMZ), 
pseudotachylyte  veins,  buck  quartz-carbonate  (±  tourmaline)  veins,  cataclasite,  quartz-
chlorite  shears  and  L-S  tectonites.  This  phase  marks  a  period  of  sinistral  (reverse) 
displacement along the Markoye fault. 
The  meta-sedimentary  units  east  of  the  MMZ  are  folded  about  NE-trending  fold  axes 
(F2) as is evident from LANDSAT imagery (Fig. 2). F2 folds are tight and asymmetric. 
They are crosscut by the MMZ. 
The Mukosi Mylonite Zone (MMZ) crops out east of Salmossi village (Fig. 2). The MMZ 
is  NE-trending.  This  zone  is  defined  by  mylonitised  to  ultra-mylonitised  meta-
sedimentary rocks and granitoids. The MMZ is a planar, banded, corridor of fine grained 
rock  with  a  well  developed  mylonitic  fabric,  and  numerous  σ  and  δ  clasts  and  rotated 
porphyroclasts.  The  sky-blue  sigmoidal  porphyroclasts  (cordierite)  are  hosted  in  a  fine 
grained dark-blue-grey coloured matrix (Fig. 13). There are well developed shear bands, 
meso-isoclinal and asymmetric flow folds (Fig. 14 and 15 respectively). The MMZ hosts 
a penetrative mylonitic foliation and a well developed vertical stretching lineation that is 
NE-trending. Stretching lineation in granitoid rocks is defined by the mineral hornblende. 
Two zones were defined: (1) steeply dipping mylonite foliation and zones of boudinage 
in  which  stretching  lineation  was  vertical  (Fig.16)  which  were  bounded  by  (2)  steeply 
dipping corridors of mylonite foliation in which stretching lineation was horizontal (Fig. 
16). The poles to the mylonite foliation are vertical and this is well illustrated in Figure 
16.  The  MMZ  is  interpreted  as  a  high  strain  zone  which  represents  the  ductile 
deformation  phase  of  D2.  The  MMZ  crosscuts  the  meta-sedimentary  units  and  the 
granitoid. 
27

--- Page 34 ---
In Figure 16 the stereographic projections of the lineation and schematic structural model 
shows  the  extension  direction  relative  to  the  principal  compressive  stress.  The  sense  of 
movement  is  interpreted  from  the  K-feldspar  fish  structure,  and  σ  and  δ  clasts.  The  σ 
clasts indicate a sinistral (reverse) displacement (Fig. 16). The MMZ is crosscut by meso-
faults and quartz-chlorite shears. The quartz-chlorite shears are mineralized. 
Pseudotachylyte  veins  in  the  area  are  represented  by  very  fine  grained  glassy  textured, 
dark-grey  to  black  glass  that  fill  fractures  and  meso-faults  in  the  host  rocks.  They  are 
several centimetres thick (Fig. 17, a, b). They outcrop in the region between Tin Agadel 
and  Salmossi  village  (Fig.  2)  and  they  crosscut  the  adamellite  and  the  granodiorite-
tonalite intrusion (Fig.17, a, b) north-east of Tin Agadel. The pseudotachylyte veins are 
NNE-trending and steeply dipping to the east. The pseudotachylyte veins are interpreted 
to have formed during high strain conditions, the resulting frictional heat melting the host 
rock (Davis and Reynolds, 1996). 
Quartz iron-rich cataclasite veins (Fig. 18, a, b, c) outcrops west of the Yacouba Mafic 
Complex  (YMC)  (Fig.2).  The  cataclasite  veins  trends  067º  and  crosscut  the  YMC.  The 
cataclasite veins are interpreted to have formed during local dilation of the Markoye fault. 
Quartz-chlorite  shear  crosscut  the  cataclasite  and  the  YMC  as  well  indicating  that  the 
quartz-chlorite shears are younger than the YMC and the cataclasite.     
Buck quartz-carbonate (± tourmaline) veins outcrop in several locations along the trend 
of  the  Markoye  fault.  They  are  white  to  brown  in  colour  but  in  some  outcrop  they  are 
dark grey and hosted by quartz-chlorite schist. They have an average size of 100 X 5m 
(Fig. 19) and veins form an en echelon array indicating a sinistral normal displacement. 
They  host  centimetre-sized  arsenopyrite  (AsFeS2)  crystals  and  copper  oxide  in  form  of 
malachite  (Cu2CO3(OH)2).  Some  buck  quartz-carbonate  veins  are  highly  fractured, 
boudinaged and lineated, producing an egg box textured outcrop (Fig. 19). The stretching 
lineation plunges steeply with a mean of 68º towards 162° (Fig. 20).  
28

--- Page 35 ---
The quartz-chlorite shears are NE-trending.  The schitosity measurements are represented 
in  Figure  21.  Schistosity  crosscuts  the  YMC  and  MMZ.  The  anastomosing  cleavage  is 
developed at the edge of YMC. 
5.4 Relative chronology of structural events 
- Formation of NW-trending folds (F1) and thrusts during SW-directed compression with 
dextral reverse movement on the Markoye fault. 
-  Formation  of  NE-trending  folds  (F2)  during  SE-NW  compression  with  sinistral 
(reverse) displacement on the Markoye fault with development of mylonite zone (MMZ) 
and pseudotachylyte veins and quartz iron-rich cataclasite veins. 
-  Formation  of  quartz-chlorite  shears  which  host  buck-quartz  carbonate  (±  tourmaline), 
stockwork,  and  breccia  veins.  The  veins  are  associated  with  sulphide  ±  gold 
mineralization. 
5.5 Markoye Fault versus Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ) 
Markoye  fault  is  defined  by  ductile  (mylonitised  meta-sedimentary  rocks  and  granitoid 
rocks) deformation, with the development of regional mylonite foliation and schistosity. 
The Markoye fault is ~5 km wide, and is a composed of numerous faults and shears. The 
shears are well defined by development of C-S foliation, en echelon quartz-carbonate (± 
tourmaline)  veins,  and  mineral,  stretching  and  slickenfibre  lineation.  Hence  it  is  not  a 
fault in the strict sense of the term. It is therefore suggested that it be renamed as a shear 
zone, the Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ). 
29

--- Page 36 ---
Figure  11.  Photographic  mosaic  of  Essakane  exploration  trench  number  1.  This  trench 
wall  is  southeast  facing,  and  the  pictures  were  taken  facing  to  the  northwest.  The 
Essakane  prospect  is  hosted  by  an  asymmetric  open  anticline.  The  stockwork,  breccia, 
and  sheeted  quartz-carbonate  veins  are  concentrated  (hosted)  in  the  eastern  limb,  the 
west-dipping cavities on the NE limb where produced by orpailleurs who excluded west-
dipping, gold bearing veins. 
30

--- Page 37 ---
Calculated fold axis 
Figure  12.  Equal  area  stereographic  projection  of  the  poles  to  bedding  at  Essakane 
exploration  trenches.  The  calculated  mean  strike  and  dip  is  343°/27°E.  The  calculated 
best  fit  girdle  is  078°/88°S.  The  spread  of  the  poles  along  the  girdle  indicates  that  the 
bedding has been folded; the calculated mean strike and dip is inferred to parallel the fold 
axes.  The  fold  is  asymmetric  with  the  fold  vergence  to  the  SW  indicating  that  the 
transport direction is toward the SW.  
31

--- Page 38 ---
Figure  13.    Mylonite  hosting  sigmoidal  porphyroclasts  of  cordierite  in  a  fine  grained 
dark-blue-grey  coloured  matrix.  The  sigmoidal  porphyroclasts 
indicate  sinistral 
displacement. GPS, N 14 36 43 9 E 00 00 01 4. 
32

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 14. Meso-isoclinal folds in the MMZ. GPS, N 14 36 39 4 E 00 00 10 4. 
33

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 15. Mylonite with well developed asymmetric flow folds that developed during a 
sinistral  displacement  on  the  MMZ.  The  folds  are  synchronous  with  the  horizontal 
stretching lineation. GPS, 14 36 37 8 E 00 00 12 1. 
34

--- Page 41 ---
σ1 
N
Mylonitic lineation 
Mylonitic foliation 
Poles to mylonitic 
foliation 
σ1 
Figure 16. Equal area stereographic  projections  of  mineral and  stretching lineation, and 
foliation  in  mylonite.  The  calculated  mean  principal  direction  is  73°  towards  056°  for 
lineation. The lineation lie on the calculated great circle orientated 025°/81°E. The poles 
in  the  middle  of  the  great  circle  show  vertical  stretch  and  the  poles  in  the  sides  shows 
horizontal stretching parallel to foliation. The model is illustrating the strain partitioning 
in the MMZ.  
35

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 17. Pseudotachylyte veins crosscutting the (a) adamellite (GPS, N 14 34 57 9 W 
00 02 03 6) and (b) granodiorite (GPS, N 14 32 40 6 W 00 00 39 2). 
36

--- Page 43 ---
Figure  18.    (a,  b,  c)  Quartz  iron-rich  cataclasite  veins  in  the  Markoye  fault.  The  quartz 
iron-rich  cataclasite  hosts  quartz-carbonate  veins.  The  Orpailleurs  happened  to  be 
panning gold from the weathered debris of the cataclasite. GPS, N 14 30 53 2 E 00 00 22 
6. 
37

--- Page 44 ---
Figure 19. Buck-quartz carbonate veins located NE of Tin Taradat Village. The egg box 
appearance  is  associated  with  formation  of  boudins  which  plunge  steeply.  Slickensides 
are steeply plunging. GPS, N 14 30 47 6 E 00 00 17 7. 
38

--- Page 45 ---
087°/68°S 
Figure  20.  Equal  area  stereographic  projection  of  L-tectonites.  The  data  lies  on  the 
calculated  girdle  of  087°/  68°S.  This  data  shows  the  preferred  orientation  of  the  L-
tectonites. The mean transport direction is vertical (vertical extension) and slightly to the 
south.  
39

--- Page 46 ---
Figure  21.  Equal  area  stereographic  projections  of  poles  to  schistosity.  The  calculated 
mean principal orientation is 025°/86°W. Schistosity represents the reactivation phase in 
the Markoye fault. 
40

--- Page 47 ---
Chapter 6: Discussion 
6.1 Meta-sedimentary units and environments of deposition  
Although  limited  by  the  availability  of  outcrops  due  to  the  Sahara  sand  dunes,  laterite, 
and  alluvial  cover,  two  stratigraphic  sequences  are  recognised  in  the  study  area; 
volcanoclastic  and  sedimentary.  These  units  are  metamorphosed  to  hornblende-hornfels 
facies through contact metamorphism, but primary sedimentary structures are preserved 
as  compositional  layers  (Chapter  4).  Primary  structures  include  graded  bedding,  flaser 
and cross-bedding, fine laminations, ripple marks, slumps, and scour and fill. 
The  primary  structures  indicate  a  single  environment  of  deposition:  shallow  marine 
continental shelf at a delta front setting. The fining up sequence (graded bedding), slumps 
(gravity  flow),  mud  and  sand  balls,  lithic  fragments,  ripples,  scour  and  fill,  mud-cracks 
and laminations in meta-volcanoclastic greywacke sequences suggest that the setting was 
subjected  to  tidal  and  or  turbidity  currents  (Eriksson  et  al.,  1998;  2005;  Sultan  and 
Björklund, 2006). The upward-fining, laminations, slumps, lithic fragments, and graded 
beds, with scour and fill bases, are characteristic of  turbidity  currents  that operates at a 
delta  front  (Shanmugan,  1997;  Sultan  and  Björklund,  2006),  and  the  ripples  are 
characteristic of tidal currents (Sultan and Björklund, 2006).  
The presence of black shale and siltstone at Essakane provides evidence of fine material 
deposited  by  suspension  settling  at  the  delta  front  (Eriksson  et  al.,  1998;  Sultan  and 
Björklund,  2006).  The  meta-volcanoclastic  greywackes  host  thin  intercalated  layers  of 
fuchsite  and  mud-cracks.  Fuchsite  layers  and  mud-cracks  can  form  in  lagoonal 
(continental  shelf)  environments  were  temperature  and  availability  of  water  is  the 
controlling  factors  (Sultan  and  Björklund,  2006).  The  meta-conglomerate  contains  sub-
rounded to rounded clasts indicating a local origin and short transportation distance. The 
conglomerate  units  were  probably  deposited  proximal  to  the  source  in  a  deltaic 
environment  (Eriksson  et  al.,  1998).  The  presence  of  stromatolites  in  greywacke 
41

--- Page 48 ---
sandstone also suggest shallow marine environment of deposition with high sea salinity 
(Altermann, 2002; Eriksson et al., 2005).  
6.2 Tarkwa Group 
The conglomerate units classified as Tarkwa Group consists of greater than 90% rounded 
vein quartz pebbles, and 10% schist and quartzite pebbles in black sand matrix (Milési et 
al.,  1989,  1991;  Bossière  et  al.,  1996).  However  the  meta-conglomerate  defined  in  the 
study area consists of sub-angular to sub-rounded clasts and boulders of basalt, andesite, 
granodiorite,  granite,  volcanoclastic  meta-sediments,  chert,  and  lithic  fragments  in 
greenish-grey greywacke-lithic matrix. The meta-conglomerate is therefore by no means 
similar  to  the  meta-conglomerate  described  for  the  Tarkwa  type  section  in  Ghana.  The 
meta-sedimentary  rocks  classified  as  Tarkwa  Group  by  Castaing  et  al.  (2003)  are 
reclassified as Birimian flysch type sediments, as described by Milési et al. (1989). 
6.3 Relative chronology of intrusions 
The  relative  chronology  of  igneous  events  is  based  on  crosscutting  relationships.  The 
volcano-sedimentary and sedimentary rocks of the study area are intruded by adamellite 
(granite),  granodiorite-tonalite,  pyroxenite-gabbro,  and  lastly,  dolerite  dykes.  The 
adamellite  was  deformed  during  D1  and  D2.  The  granodiorite-tonalite  intrusions  have 
been classified as a syn-Eburnean in age by Milési et al. (1989), Abouchami and Boher, 
(1990),  Boher et  al. (1992), Pons et al. (1995), Oberthür et al. (1998),  and  Béziat et al. 
(2000)  and  contain  enclaves  of  adamellite.  The  granodiorite-tonalite  intrusions  are 
therefore younger than the adamellite. 
The granodiorite-tonalite contains xenoliths of pyroxenite-gabbro and it is crosscut by S2 
and pseudotachylyte veins. The pyroxenite-gabbro intrusion is also crosscut by S2. The 
granodiorite-tonalite  intrusions  are  therefore  younger  than  the  pyroxenite-gabbro 
intrusion.  
42

--- Page 49 ---
Four  emplacement  events  can  therefore  be  accounted  for  in  the  study  area,  i.e.,  (1) 
emplacement  of  the  adamellite  (granite),  syn-  to  post-Birimian  sedimentation;  (2) 
emplacement of pyroxenite-gabbro; (3) emplacement of granodiorite-tonalite; (4) and the 
emplacement of dolerite dykes.  
6.4 Relative chronology of structural and metamorphic events 
Two phases of deformation are recognised related to the Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ) in 
the area. The first deformation event (D1) is related to the development of NW-trending 
folds (F1) and this event has been recorded by Ouedraogo and Prost (1986), Feybesse et 
al. (1990) and Hein et al. (2004. The meta-sedimentary rocks of the Birimian (sandstone 
and  siltstone  sequence)  are  folded  about  NW-trending  fold  axes.  The  palaeo-principle 
stress  orientation  during  the  time  is  interpreted  as  SW-directed,  and  this  orientation 
would have dextrally displaced the MSZ.  
The second deformation event (D2) is related to NW-SE crustal shortening (Lompo et al., 
1991; Feybesse et al., 2006) and formation of NE-trending folds (F2), and NE-trending 
cleavage (S2). D2 is related to formation of regional NE-trending C-S foliation, shears, 
and faults (Ouedraogo and Prost, 1986; Feybesse et al., 1990; Lompo et al., 1991; Hein et 
al.,  2004)  and  mylonite,  pseudotachylyte  veins,  quartz  iron-rich  cataclasite  veins,  buck 
quartz-carbonate (± tourmaline) veins and quartz-chlorite shears in the study area. D2 is 
also related to syn-tectonic emplacement of the granodiorite-tonalite plutons in the study 
area  and  is  consistent  with  regional  interpretation  of  Boher  et  al.  (1992),  Pons  et  al. 
(1995),  Béziat  et  al.  (2000),  Hein  et  al.  (2004)  and  Naba  et  al.  (2004)  of  pluton 
emplacement  during  the  Eburnean  Orogeny.  D2  is  characterised  by  sinistral  (reverse) 
displacement on the MSZ (Fig. 16).  
Displacement during D2 created dilational structures that where filled with silica-rich. It 
is suggested that this fluids deposited gold-bearing sulphides (Milési et al., 1989).  
43

--- Page 50 ---
The early phase of D2 is associated with medium to high grade metamorphic conditions 
with  high  strain  along  the  MSZ  and  formation  of  the  MMZ  and  pseudotachylyte  veins 
(Fig.  2).  Quartz  iron-rich  cataclasite  veins  and  buck  quartz-carbonate  (±  tourmaline) 
veins  in  quartz-chlorite  shears  crosscut  the  MMZ  and  are  interpreted  to  represent  low 
strain rates during progressive deformation on the MSZ. Quartz-chlorite shear zones are 
gold bearing at Essakane goldfield.   
6.5 Relative and Absolute chronologies (Tectonic history) 
Although  absolute  dating  can  delineate  separate  stratigraphic  sequences  and  tectonic 
events based on heavy or light mineral analysis, these minerals are rarely available and 
the analyses are limited by availability of resources. Due to geological processes that are 
continuously  taking  place,  including,  erosion,  deposition  and  tectonic  events,  complete 
stratigraphic  sequences  are  rarely  available  to  define  absolute  ages,  and  therefore,  it  is 
generally  simple  to  establish  the  spatial  and  temporal  relationship  of  the  various 
geological  features  in  the  region  by  establishing  the  crosscutting  relationships.  The 
relative  chronology  (tectonic  history)  of  the  study  area  is  summarised  below  from  the 
oldest to the youngest. 
1.  A protolith composed of volcanic-plutonic terrain of granite, granodiorite, basalt, 
and andesite is interpreted as the source rocks to the Birimian sediments. 
2.  Erosion and development of a regional unconformity (Milési et al., 1989; Davis et 
al., 1994; Feybesse and Milési., 1994).  
3.  Deposition  of  Birimian  sediments 
including 
(1) 
intercalated 
layers  of 
conglomerate  (that  have  clasts  of  granite,  basalt,  andesites,  granodiorite, 
volcanoclastic  meta-sedimentary,  chert,  and  lithic  fragments),  (2)  greywackes 
sandstone, (3) shale, and (4) siltstone units. 
4.  Intrusion of the pyroxenite-gabbro pluton (YMC) (Béziat et al., 2000; Hein et al., 
2004). It contact metamorphosed the wall rock to hornblende-hornfels facies and 
contains xenoliths of the wall rock. It is crosscut by S2.   
5.  Intrusion of adamellite (granite). 
44

--- Page 51 ---
6.  D1. Development of NW-trending asymmetric folds (F1) and thrusts during SW-
directed compression. 
7.  D2.  Development  of  NE-trending  foliation  (S2),  NE-trending  folds  (F2),  and 
refolding  of  D1  structures  during  the  NW-SE  crustal  shortening.  This  is 
interpreted as part of the Eburnean Orogeny. 
8.  Intrusion of syn-orogenic  granodiorite-tonalite bodies. The intrusion hosts mafic 
and  sedimentary  xenoliths.  Contact  metamorphism  of 
the  wall  rock 
to 
hornblende-hornfels facies. 
9.  Development of Mukosi Mylonite Zone (MMZ) and pseudotachylyte veins during 
sinistral  (reverse)  displacement  (east  block  down)  on  the  MSZ.  The  MMZ 
crosscuts meta-sedimentary rocks and plutons.  
10. Reactivation  of  MSZ.  Quartz-chlorite  shears  which  hosts  stockwork  and 
brecciated  quartz-carbonate  (±  tourmaline)  veins  that  crosscut  the  meta-
sedimentary  rocks.  Sulphides  are  hosted  in  the  fractures  and  alteration  zones  of 
these veins. Gold mineralization has a spatial and temporal relationship with the 
quartz-chlorite shears. Schistosity crosscuts the YMC and the MMZ.  
11. Emplacement  of  dolerite  dykes  and  contact  metamorphism  of  meta-sedimentary 
rocks to hornblende-hornfels facies. 
12. Development of laterite (Ferricrete) and alluvial profile. 
Absolute  geochronology  has  been  conducted  in  some  parts  of  the  West  African  Craton 
and  the  dates  are  presented  in  Figure  22.  Figure  22  plots  the  age  of  the  Birimian 
sequences,  granitoids,  Eburnean  Orogeny,  gold  mineralization  and  Tarkwa  Group 
sediments.  The  geochronological  data  is  confusing.  The  deposition  of  the  Birimian 
sequences and the Tarkwa sediment, and the emplacement of Eburnean plutons, all give 
the  same  approximate  absolute  ages.  This  may  be  the  results  of  imprecision  of  various 
dating  techniques  used,  errors  on  sample  collection  (xenocrystic  zircons  in  plutonic 
rocks) or a number of other reasons. However the relative chronology is clear on some 
parts.  
45

--- Page 52 ---
(1) Stratigraphically it is well known from field studies (Milési et al., 1989, 1992; Leube 
et al., 1990; Davis et al., 1994; Castaing et al., 2003; Tunks et al., 2004) that the Tarkwa 
Group  sediments  lie  unconformably  on  the  Birimian  sequences,  and  sourcing  Birimian 
sediments (Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1991). In the Figure 22 there is only one data 
set which agrees with this field observation. All the ages for Tarkwa Group are the same 
as the Birimian sequences, leading to a conclusion that the Tarkwa Group was deposited 
at the same time as the Birimian. This is illogical. 
(2)  Published  data  and  field  studies  clearly  indicate  that  TTG  suite  plutons  were  not 
emplaced  during  the  deposition  of  the  Birimian  sequences.  They  are  syn-  to  post-
Eburnean Orogeny by age (Béziat et al., 2000; Castaing et al., 2003; Hein et al., 2004). 
However most of the published ages in Figure 22 imply syn-depositional emplacement.  
(3) In Figure 22 the ages for granite suite rocks are younger than, or, synchronous to, the 
emplacement of tonalite suite rocks. At Essakane goldfield granite xenoliths are hosted in 
tonalite, which means that the granite suite is older than the tonalite suite. 
Consequently the data set shows inconsistencies and this needs further investigation.  
46

--- Page 53 ---
Figure 22. Published absolute geochronology for rocks of the West African Craton after, 1, 4, 8, Hirdes et al., 1987 (Rb/Sr), 1992, 1996, 2. Milési 
et al., 1989 (Rb/Sr), 3. Leube et al., 1990, 5.Davis et al., 1994 (U-Pb), 6. Pons et al., 1995, 7. Bossière et al., 1996 (Pb-evaporation), 9, 12.Hirdes 
and Davis, 1998, 2002 (U-Pb), 10.Oberthür et al., 1998 (U-Pb),   11. Egal et al., 2002 (Pb-evaporation), 13. Castaing et al., 2003(Pb-Pb, K-Ar), 
14.Dioh et al., 2006, 15. Feybesse et al., 2006 (Pb-evaporation, Sm-Nd, K-Ar, Ar39/Ar40). 
47

--- Page 54 ---
Chapter 7: Conclusion 
The Markoye fault is a broad zone of faulting, shearing, mylonite zone, pseudotachylyte 
veins, L-tectonites, quartz iron-rich cataclasite veins and quartz-carbonate (± tourmaline) 
veins and is renamed as the Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ).  
The  lithologies  of  Essakane  goldfield  consist  of  metamorphosed  Birimian  volcano-
sedimentary  and  sedimentary  sequences  that  were  deposited  in  a  shallow  marine 
continental shelf at a delta front setting. These sequences have been intruded by plutonic 
rocks  that  include  granodiorite-tonalite,  pyroxenite-gabbro,  granite  (adamellite)  plutons 
and dolerite dykes. The plutons and dyke systems have contact metamorphosed the rocks 
of  the  region  to  hornblende-hornfels  facies,  but  primary  sedimentary  structures  are 
preserved as compositional layers. All the lithologies in the area have been subjected to 
several phases of local-regional deformation, with development of mylonite, schistosity, 
and L-tectonite.  
Two phases of deformation are recognised related to the Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ) in 
the  area.  D1  pre-dates  the  Eburnean  deformation.  This  deformation  is  characterised  by 
asymmetric NW-trending folds (F1) axes planes with the principal transport to the SW. 
The D2 is characterised by the development of the MMZ, pseudotachylyte veins, quartz 
iron-rich  cataclasite  veins,  and  buck-quartz  carbonate  veins,  with  sinistral  reverse 
displacement,  east  block  down  along  the  MSZ,  and  the  refolding  of  F1  to  F2  (NE-
trending folds axes planes) and development of NE-trending S2 and is correlated with the 
Eburnean Orogeny at 2150 to 2095 Ma. The reactivation phase of D2 is characterised by 
greenschist  metamorphic  facies  with  sinistral  displacement,  west  block  down  along  the 
MSZ, stockwork, and breccia veins that are sulphides bearing. 
The  above  data  indicates  that  the  MSZ  have  a  long  tectonic  history.  This  first  order 
crustal scale structure has been active pre-, syn-, to post- Eburnean Orogeny, and it is not 
a Pan African in age. The gold mineralization in the Essakane goldfield is related to the 
late quartz-chlorite schist of D2. 
48
