
--- Page 6 ---
Abstract 
The  gold-hosting  sedimentary  sequences  of  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone  belt  underwent  four 
events to give rise to the gold mineralisation. The alteration that resulted during the metamorphism of 
the  rocks  is  linked  to  the  gold  mineralisation.  Subsequent  to  deposition  of  sediments,  regional 
metamorphism during the Eburnean orogeny gave rise to greenschist facies metamorphic assemblages 
and  two  deformation  phases.    The  first  deformation  phase  resulted  in  development  of  NW-NNW 
trending  folds  (F1),  NW-NNW  trending  foliation  (S1)  and  extensional-conjugate  vein  sets  (V1), 
interpreted  as  Tangaean  (D1)  structures.  The  second  deformation  phase  resulted  in  development  of 
NE-NNE trending faults, stockwork veins (V2) and NE trending foliation (S2) associated with dextral 
shear  zones, 
interpreted  as  Eburnean  (D2)  structures.  The  sequences  underwent  contact 
metamorphism to hornblende-hornfels facies during the intrusion of granitoid plutons (syn-Eburnean). 
Retrograde processes from the cooling of the granitoids resulted in the remobilisation of fluids in the 
supracrustal rocks, which travelled via shears and fracture zones resulting in alteration of the wallrock 
including sericitisation, silicification, carbonatisation and chloritisation (with sulphidation).  The gold 
mineralisation  occurs  in  the  chloritisation  stage  of  the  alteration  and  is  associated  with  the  mineral 
arsenopyrite.  Precipitation of sulphides in fractures lead to quartz-carbonate stockwork  vein hosted 
gold mineralisation. The mineralisation is interpreted to be post Tangaean (D1) and synchronous to 
the  intrusion  of  granitoids  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  (D2).  The  mineralisation  is  defined  as 
orogenic gold under the subdivision of thermal-aureole gold. 
v

--- Page 7 ---
Chapter 1 
1.1 Introduction 
The Oudalan-Gorouol greenstone belt is located in north-eastern Burkina Faso (Fig. 1.1) in the West 
African  craton,  and  extends  into  the  neighbouring  Niger.  The  greenstone  belt  is  characterised  by 
meta-volcanic  and  meta-sedimentary  rocks,  and  intruded  by  various  igneous  rocks  (Tshibubudze  et 
al., 2009). It hosts various Au deposits, notably the Essakane goldfield, but smaller artisanal sites can 
be found throughout the belt (Tshibubudze et al., 2009).  
The ore genesis of Essakane, Falagountou and Sokadie areas has not been defined. Researchers have 
identified  that    quartz-vein  hosted  gold  in the  Birimian  of  West  African  craton  can  be  attributed  to 
deformation in the Eburnean Orogeny (Hastings, 1982; Milési et al., 1992; Dzigbodi-Adjimah, 1993; 
Béziat et al., 2008). Groves et al. (1998) and Goldfarb et al. (2000) classified gold in West Africa as 
orogenic gold and gold in Burkina Faso has also been classified as orogenic gold (Béziat et al., 2008). 
Taner  (2004)  recognised  a  relationship  between  the  gold  mineralisation  and  intrusions  in  the 
Falagountou and Essakane deposits. The gold in these deposits can be classified as mesothermal lode 
gold, thermal-aureole gold or intrusion-related gold. 
1

--- Page 8 ---
1.2 Overview of the Study Area 
The  study  area  is  located  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone  belt  ~250km  to  the  north-east  of 
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Burkina Faso is a landlocked country in West Africa which covers 274 
300  square  kilometres  in  area  (Bierschenk,  1968),  and  shares  its  borders  with  Mali,  Togo,  Benin, 
Ghana, Niger and Côte d’Ivoire. The official language is French, with Mooré and Dioula. The religion 
dominantly practised is Islam with >50% of the population being Muslim, the remaining religions are 
Christianity and indigenous African religions.  
Burkina Faso is defined by low hills and alluvial plains and is covered by an extensive laterite plateau 
located at the southern edge of the Sahara Desert, with sand dunes (desert) to the north (Bierschenk, 
1968). Central Burkina Faso is a savanna plateau and 198-305 metres above sea level. The Sahelian 
climate characterises this area, where there is eight to nine months of dry season and a rainy season 
from June to September. The average daily temperature has been recorded as 32°C and the average 
annual  rainfall  is  less  than  25  centimetres  in  the  north  and  north-east.  The  hot  desert  winds 
(harmattan) add to the dryness of the region. 
2

--- Page 9 ---
N 
(a) 
N 
See LANDSAT image 
on the next page 
(b) 
Figure 1.1: Simplified geological map of (a) the West African Craton and (b) the greenstone belts of Burkina Faso after Béziat et al. (2008) 
3

--- Page 10 ---
N 
N 
32km 
Essakane 
Falagountou 
Sokadie 
8km 
Figure 1.2: LANDSAT image of the Oudalan-Gorouol Greenstone belt in Burkina Faso and the locations of the deposits 
4

--- Page 11 ---
1.3 Aims and Objectives of the Project 
The  main  aim  of  the  project  is  to  characterise  the  metallogenic  system  for  each  deposit  through 
petrographic  study  and  development  of  a  paragenetic  sequence  to  constrain  an  ore  genesis  model 
(mineralogy,  alteration,  microstructure,  host  rocks,  etc.)  for  exploration  for  gold  throughout  the 
greenstone belt.  
Objectives: 
- 
- 
to select 15 samples and do petrography, mineralogy and ore petrology of the study areas 
to determine the genesis of the ore in the greenstone belt 
5

--- Page 12 ---
Chapter 2: Geology 
2.1 Regional Geology 
The West African craton (WAC) is ~ 4.5 million km2 and comprises two shields, the Reguibat Rise in 
the north and the Leo-Man Rise to the south (Milési et al., 1992; Villeneuve and Cornée, 1994; Attoh 
and Ekwueme, 1997; Potrel et al., 1998). The Taoudeni basin, situated in the central part of the craton, 
separates the two shields and is Neo-Proterozoic to Devonian in age (Dioh et al., 2006). The Leo-Man 
Rise  in  the  south  comprises  two  domains:  the  Archaean  Kenéma-Man  domain  and  the 
Palaeoproterozoic  Baoulé-Mossi  domain.  The  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  is  host  to  Birimian  sequences, 
and these include meta-sedimentary and meta-volcanic rocks (Milési et al., 1991; Dzigbodi-Adjimah, 
1993). Based on previous interpretations by Milési et al. (1991), Debat et al. (2003), Dioh et al. (2006) 
and  Béziat  et  al.  (2008),  the  Birimian  terrains  consists  of  sedimentary  basins,  and  linear  to  arcuate 
volcanic belts that  correspond to the period of accretion during the Eburnean orogeny. 
The north-eastern Burkina Faso consists of the Palaeoproterozoic metasedimentary and metavolcanic 
Birimian sequences (2184–2135 Ma) (Davis et al., 1994). The sequences are divided into the upper 
and lower Birimian. These are unconformably overlain by the Tarkwa Group (2194-2132 Ma), first 
described  in  the  Birim  River  in  Ghana  and  are  believed  to  be  derivatives  of  the  upper  Birimian 
(Hastings,  1982;  Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Dzigbodi-Adjimah,  1993;  Bossiére  et  al.,  1996;  Davis  et  al., 
1994).  The  sequences  were  deformed  during  Eburnean  orogeny  (2.2-2.0  Ga)  (Hastings,  1982; 
Liégeois  et  al.,  1991).  The  area  was  also  intruded  by  a  series  of  syn-  to  post  orogenic  granitoids, 
which constitute ~70% of the Birimian group (Naba et al., 2004). 
The Birimian can be divided into the upper and lower Birimian (Junner, 1940). The upper Birimian 
consists  of  a  detrital  sedimentary  pile  i.e.  volcaniclastics,  turbidites,  shale  and  carbonate  units  and 
these are interbedded with calc-alkaline volcanics (Leube et al., 1990; Hirdes et al., 1996; Roddaz et 
al., 2007). The lower Birimian consists of a thick sequence of pillowed tholeiitic basalts, dolerites and 
gabbros;  interlayered  with  the  basalts  are  immature  sediments  and  carbonates  (Leube  et  al.,  1990; 
Roddaz  et  al.,  2007).  There  is  a  controversy  on  the  stratigraphic  position  of  the  Birimian  rocks, 
whether the  B1 is  younger  than the  B2  or  vice-versa  (Hirdes  et al.  1996). The Birimian  in  Burkina 
Faso was deposited within an active continental margin/ marginal marine setting in which the detritus 
was  derived  from  an  adjacent  volcanic  arc  (Hein  et  al.,  2004;  Roddaz  et  al.,  2007).
6

--- Page 13 ---
The  Birimian sequences  were intruded by  syn-  to  post  orogenic,  alkaline to calc-alkaline  granitoids 
during the Eburnean Orogeny (Leube et al., 1990; Naba et al., 2004). The emplacement resulted in ~ 
70% of the Birimian formation being intruded by granitoids. The granitoids range from granodiorite-
tonalite-trondjemite (TTG) suite to peraluninous granite plutons; U-Pb zircon dating of the granitoids 
put  the  age  of  emplacement  at  2190-2108  Ma  (Hirdes  et  al.,  1996;  Béziat  et  al.,  2000;  Naba  et  al., 
2004; Hein (in press)). These granitoids are referred to as the Eburnean granitoids (Pons et al., 1995; 
Naba  et  al.,  2004).  Naba  et  al.  (2004)  described  the  granitoids  as  circular  to  elliptical,  isolated  to 
nested  coalescent  bodies  and  are  aligned  or  more/less  interlocked.  The  TTG  suite  contact 
metamorphosed the Birimian sequences (Hein, et al., 2004; Naba et al., 2004).  
The  rocks  were  metamorphosed  to  lower  greenschist  facies  during  the  Eburnean  orogeny  which  is 
characterised by the development of the mineral assemblage of prehnite, chlorite, actinolite, albite in 
mafic  rocks,  and  muscovite,  albite  and  quartz  in  the  sedimentary  sequences  (Leube  et  al.,  1990; 
Dzigbodi-Adjmah,  1992;  Debat  et  al.,  2003;  Naba  et  al.,  2004;  Béziat  et  al.,  2000).  In  the  contact 
aureole of the granitoids, the metamorphic grade is low- to medium grade amphibolite facies, which is 
characterised  by  biotite,  muscovite  and  quartz  (Leube  et  al.,  1990;  Naba  et  al.,  2004,  Tunks  et  al., 
2004).  The  Palaeoproterozoic  Birimian  sequences  in  NE  Burkina  Faso  are  also  crosscut  by  late 
WNW-trending  dolerite  dykes,  which  are  younger  in  age  than  the  granitoids  (Hein,  2009; 
Tshibubudze et al., 2009).  
The Birimian sequences are unconformably overlain by the Tarkwa Group, which was first described 
in Ghana. Tshibubudze et al. (2009), refutes the notion that the conglomerate units in the Birimian of 
Burkina Faso are Tarkwaian.  
North-eastern  Burkina  Faso  is  characterised  by  three  tectonic  events;  D1,  D2  and  D3  termed  the 
Tangaean  event,  Eburnean  Orogeny  and  the  Wabo-Tampelse  event,  respectfully  (Hein,  2009; 
Tshibubudze et al., 2009). The Tangaean event resulted in the development of a NW-NNW trending 
fold-thrust belt ca. 2171-2130Ma (Hein, 2009). The Oudalan-Gorouol greenstone belt was intersected 
by NE-trending shear zones, related to deformation during the Eburnean orogeny (Tshibubudze et al., 
2009;  Hein,  2009).  The  deformation  D2  is  characterised  by  the  development  of  NNE-NE  trending 
mylonite and shear zone, F2 folds and a penetrative schistocity (S-C2 to S2), which crosscut the D1 
structures (Hein, 2009; Tshibubudze et al., 2009). The deformation D3 is not defined in the Oudalan-
Gorouol  greenstone  belt,  but  is  well  developed  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  and  post-dates  the 
Eburnean orogeny (Hein et al., 2004; Hein, 2009).  
The  Palaeoproterozoic  Birimian  sequences  were  sheared  by  a  first-order  crustal  scale  structure,  the 
Markoye  Shear  Zone,  which  marks  the  western  boundary  of  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone  belt 
7

--- Page 14 ---
(Tshibubudze et al., 2009). This is a NE-trending zone characterised by large scale faulting, shearing 
and  mylonite  zone  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  The  Markoye  Shear  Zone  underwent  two  phases  of 
reactivation  with  two  deformation  events  i.e.,  D1  and  D2,  occurring  concurrently  to  that.  The  D1 
deformation event as previously discussed resulted in the development of folds that trend towards the 
NW-NNW  during  the  dextral  reverse  displacement  of  the  Markoye  Shear  Zone.  During  the  D2 
deformation  event,  the  Markoye  Shear  Zone  underwent  SE-NW  crustal  shortening  and  sinistral-
reverse displacement (Tshibubudze et al., 2009).  
2.2 Local Geology of the Study Area 
The  three  areas  that  have  been  designated  for  this  project  are  located  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol 
greenstone belt. Two of the three sites i.e. Falagountou and Sokadie are still artisanal mining sites and 
Essakane is a developing mine. Essakane is the main deposit and is 11km×3km in dimension, with 
Falagountou  and  Sokadie  located  to  the  East  and  south  of  the  Essakane  metasedimentary  belt, 
respectively (Kerr(b), 2004).  
The  dominant  stratigraphic  sequences  that  have  been  identified  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone 
belt are a volcaniclastic greywacke sequence and an interbedded conglomerate-greywacke-siltstone-
shale  sequence,  which  have  been  contact  metamorphosed  to  hornblende-hornfels  facies  during  the 
emplacement  of  igneous  bodies  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  The  environment  of  deposition  is 
interpreted to be a shallow marine continental shelf (Tshibubudze et al., 2009).  
The  supracrustal  rocks  of  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone  belt  have  experienced  two  deformation 
events  that  resulted  in  the  formation  of  shears,  folds,  mylonite  zones  and  regional  metamorphism; 
contact  metamorphism  resulted  from  the  dolerite  dykes  intruding  the  area  and  the  emplacement  of 
syn- and post-orogenic plutons (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). 
The Essakane deposit is described as quartz-carbonate hosted sulphide stockwork, with arsenopyrite-
pyrite  gold  mineralisation  (Kerr  (b),  2004;  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009),  which  formed  during  the  D2 
deformation event (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). The Sokadie deposit is hosted in a shear zone, and it is 
situated  proximally  to  the  Dori  batholith  (Kerr  (a),  2004).  The  mineralisation  in  the  Falagountou 
deposit  has  been  interpreted  to  be  a  stockwork  of  veinlets  of  quartz±carbonate-sulphide  (Kerr  (c), 
2004). The veinlets are hosted in the metasedimentary rocks together with the intrusive rocks found in 
the area (Kerr (c), 2004). 
8

--- Page 15 ---
2.3 Gold Metallogeny in West Africa 
Gold deposits in West Africa have been classified as orogenic gold deposits (Goldfarb et al., 2001; 
Groves et al., 1998). The gold forming stage of the Palaeoproterozoic is interpreted as being the third 
global  episode  of  orogenic  gold-vein  formation,  where  greenstone-sedimentary  sequences  became 
important hosts for gold (Goldfarb et al., 2001). In orogenic gold deposits, the formation of the ores is 
attributed  to  the  compressional  to  transpressional  deformation  processes  that  occur  during  the 
convergence  of  plate  margins  in  accretionary  and  collisional  orogens  (Groves  et  al.,  1998).  The 
orogenic deposits can further be classified as syn-orogenic and post-orogenic, the former describing 
ore-forming fluids that were generated and set in motion by thermal processes at depth (Groves et al., 
1998);  and  the latter considers  the  fact  that  the  ore  hosting  rocks  are  undergoing  uplift  and  cooling 
(Groves  et  al.,  1998).  These  gold  deposits  are  characterised  quartz-vein  systems,  with  mainly  Fe-
sulphides and carbonate minerals (Milési et al., 1992; Groves, 1998; Béziat et al., 2008), the gangue 
minerals associated with the greenschist facies host rocks include albite, fuchsite, chlorite, schheelite 
and  tourmaline  (Groves  et  al.,  1998).  These  orogenic  gold  deposits  are  further  divided  into  zones 
based on their temperature and depth, epizonal deposits (<6km at 150°C-300°C), mesozonal deposits 
(6-12k at 300°C-475°C), hypozonal deposits (>12km at temperatures exceeding 475°C). 
Gold mineralisation in the Birimian of the West African craton has been associated with the Eburnean 
orogeny  (Hastings,  1982;  Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Dzigbodi-Adjimah,  1993).  Dzigbodi-Adjimah,  (1993) 
distinguished  two types of gold-bearing orebodies; the quartz vein type (QVT), where the gold occurs 
with  carbonate  vein-filling  along  fractures  in  the  quartz  vein  and  the  disseminated  sulphide  type 
(DST),  where  the  gold  occurs  in  sheared  metavolcanic  rocks.  These  two  types  of  gold-bearing 
orebodies  are  characterised  by  sulphides  such  as  pyrite,  arsenopyrite,  sphalerite,  chalcopyrite, 
aurostibite,  bornite,  bournonite,  tetrahedrite,  buolangerite,  jamesonite  with  galena  occurring  as  a 
minor phase (Dzigbodi-Adjimah, 1993).  
In agreement with the classification of Groves et al., (1998), the gold deposits in Burkina Faso have 
been classified as orogenic-type gold deposits (Béziat et al., 2008). Two types of gold mineralisation 
were identified, which are similar to the type of mineralisation classified by Leube et al. 
9

--- Page 16 ---
(1990);  quartz-vein  hosted  gold  (QVT)  which  is  associated  with    pyrite  or  tourmaline  and 
disseminated gold (DST) which is commonly associated with sulphides (Fig. 2.1) (Béziat et al., 2008) 
.  
Figure 2.1: A sketch of the two gold mineralisation styles in Burkina Faso, after Béziat et al., 2008. 
10

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 3: Methodology 
3.1 Data Collection 
The  project  entailed  petrographic  work  and  field  study  of  the  deposits.  The  deposits  were  mapped 
over the June/July break, through the sponsorship of IAMGOLD Corporation. The field visit spanned 
22 days and a car was provided for transportation to and from the deposit sites.  
A  LANDSAT  image  of  a  portion  of  north-east  Burkina  Faso  was  used  to obtain  coordinates  of the 
deposit  and  thus  delineate  the  deposits.  The  equipment  used  for  the  mapping  was  graph  paper,  a 
northern  hemisphere  compass  clinometer,  a  geographical  positioning  system  (GPS),  a  hand  lens,  a 
digital camera and a geological hammer. The UTM (WGS 84) grid coordinates were drawn in on the 
graph  paper  using  the  LANDSAT  image.  The  deposits  were  each  visited  on  separate  days  and 
assigned three days to complete mapping.  
Before the actual mapping commenced, a reconnaissance of each deposit was conducted. From each 
deposit  north-south  traverses  were  made.  From  each  outcrop  in  the  area  the  lithologies  were 
identified,  bedding,  structural  features  and  veins  were  recorded.  In  areas  where  there  was  no 
significant outcrop subcrop mapping from orpaillage diggings was used to identify the lithologies, but 
no structural data was recorded. No samples were collected from the field. 
Core logging was the other aspect of the field visit. The petrographic component of the project was 
done at the University of the Witwatersrand laboratory. The samples were documented by Professor 
Kim  Hein  and  sent  to  the  SGS  laboratories  in  Booysens,  Johannesburg  to  create  polished  thin 
sections.  The  petrography  work  involved  the  use  of  both  transmitted  light  and  reflected  light 
components  of  a  microscope,  to  identify  sulphides  and  minerals  in  the  sections.  Photographs  were 
taken of thin sections of interest. 
11

--- Page 18 ---
3.2 Data Documentation 
The collected data (structural, lithological and petrographic) was documented on a Microsoft® Excel 
Spreadsheet  (Appendix  B)  for  convenience.  The  structural  data  was  interpreted  on  the  program, 
GEOrient® (Holcombe, 2008). 
12

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 4: Lithologies and Structure  
4.1 Lithologies 
4.1.1 Preamble 
The  lithologies  for  the  three  deposits  predominantly  consist  of  volcaniclastic-sedimentary  and 
sedimentary sequences, which have been intruded by numerous plutonic rocks. The dominant cover over 
the  sediments  is  laterite  and  sand  dunes.  The  alteration  noted  in  some  of  the  sequences  is  oxidation, 
kaolinisation and sericitisation. Field data was collected from 47 station points (see Appendix for station 
point spreadsheet). 
4.1.2 Falagountou 
The Falagountou orpaillage is located to the East of the Essakane main deposit. The pit is ~100×200m in 
dimension (Fig. 4.1). It is covered by an extensive laterite profile and there is abundant sand dune cover 
south  of  the  pit.  The  laterite  and  sand  dunes  made  mapping  of  the  area  challenging;  subcrop  mapping 
from the artisanal mining workings was used to determine the lithologies. The artisanal miners follow a 
series  of  quartz  veins  which  crosscut  the  lithologies.  The  veins  include  extensional  veins,  buck  quartz 
veins and stockwork veins.  
In 
the 
Falagountou 
artisanal  mine 
area 
lithologies 
included:  metasiltstone/shale, 
metagreywacke/sandstone, and gabbro dyke inferred from subcrop (boulders) in the mine. 
Metasiltstone-shale 
The pit is dominated by metasiltstone/shale.  The unit is foliated, has sandstone partings and it is oxidised 
and  kaolinised.  Malachite  staining  is  common  in  this  unit,  indicating  the  presence  of  copper  sulphide. 
This  unit  is  cross-cut  by  stockwork,  sheeted  and  extensional  quartz-carbonate  veins.  The  extensional 
veins (V1) trend approximately WNW. The quartz-carbonate-chlorite stockwork veins (V2) displace the 
extensional veins (V1), and this was followed by the development of a third generation quartz veins (V3).  
Metagreywacke-sandstone  
A  subcrop  of  foliated  metagreywacke-sandstone  was  identified  on  the  margin  of  the  pit.  The 
metagreywacke-sandstone  outcrops  were 
located 
to 
the  north  of 
the  pit  and  are  oxidised. 
13

--- Page 20 ---
Gabbro and Diorite  
The  Falagountou  deposit  is  crosscut  by  gabbro  dykes  composed  of  pyroxene,  plagioclase  and 
arsenopyrite; and diorite dykes composed of orthoclase, plagioclase, quartz, hornblende and biotite. In 
diamond  drill  core,  the  diorites  occur  at  a  shallow  depth  and  the  gabbro  occurs  towards  the  end  of 
hole. The intrusives are coarse-grained and are cross-cut by extensional quartz-carbonate veins (V1). 
Chloritisation is the most common type of alteration developed in the intrusives. 
14

--- Page 21 ---
N 
Quartz-carbonate veins 
bedding 
  Figure 4.1: The Falagountou pit 
siltstone 
15

--- Page 22 ---
4.1.3 Essakane 
The Essakane pit (Fig. 4.2) is located in the Essakane main zone. The deposit is north-west trending. 
The  deposit  is  hosted  in  a  volcaniclastic-sedimentary  sequence  covered  by  laterite  and  saprolite 
profiles. 
The  Essakane  deposit  is  intersected  by  dolerite  dykes  and  gabbroic  sills.  These  intrusive  rocks  are 
composed of pyroxene and feldspar. The sills have coarser grained euhedral, feldspar crystals. Most 
of  these  intrusives  occur  towards  the  end  of  hole  in  diamond  drilling  core.  The  dolerite  dykes  are 
trending at 334°.  
The  sedimentary  sequences  include  metavolcaniclastic  greywacke,  quartzite  and  interbedded 
sandstone, siltstone, and shale.  
Quartzite 
The quartzite is oxidised.  The sulphides are weathering out, indicated by red oxidised pyrite spots on 
the surface. The foliation is developed parallel to the bedding. The quartzite has shale laminations and 
is cross-cut by quartz-carbonate veins, with no sulphides concentrated in the veins.  
Interbedded sandstone-siltstone-graphitic shale  
This sequence of rocks is kaolinised. The sandstone and laminated siltstone/shale are interbedded in a 
fining  upward  sequence.  Facing  is  to  the  north-east,  as  determined  by  graded  beds,  scour  and  fill. 
Metavolcaniclastic greywacke also occurs at the base of the interbedded sandstone-siltstone-graphitic 
shale unit. Pyrite and arsenopyrite mineralisation occurs in these units.  The development of chlorite 
on the siltstone was noted on the drill core (ERC1196D-136m). The sequences that occur lower in the 
stratigraphy are brecciated (identified in the diamond drilling core). The unit of rocks is cross-cut by 
north-east trending quartz-carbonate, quartz and quartz-chlorite extensional veins (V1); NW trending 
׳
conjugate veins (V1
) and stockwork-sheeted veins (V2). 
16

--- Page 23 ---
Fold axis 
 Figure 4.2: The Essakane Pit + Essakane anticline 
17

--- Page 24 ---
4.1.3 Sokadie 
The  Sokadie  shear  zone  (Fig.  4.3)  is  located  south  of  the  Essakane  main  deposit. The  units include 
schistose  greywacke,  sandstone,  siltstone,  quartzite  (which  were  identified  on  outcrop),  and 
greenschists  (mainly  in  the  drill  core).  The  artisanal  mine  workings  are  located  south  of  the  shear 
zone. The units are cross-cut by folded and boudinaged quartz-carbonate veins. The structural features 
and kinematics indicate that Sokadie is shear-hosted. 
Metagreywacke 
The metagreywacke unit occurs to the north of the shear zone. It has a pockmarked surface, resulting 
from  the  weathering  out  of  the  mineral  pyrite.  The  rocks  are  oriented  towards  the  north-east.  The 
outcrop of the metagreywacke has randomly oriented fractures. The unit is foliated and it is cross-cut 
by randomly oriented quartz-carbonate veins. The unit is chloritised; hence it is termed a chloritised 
metavolcaniclastic greywacke.  
Quartzite 
The quartzite unit oxidised with two generations of foliation and penetrative crenulation cleavage is 
developed throughout the rock. The unit is cross-cut by quartz-carbonate veins.  
Metasandstone-siltstone 
The  metasandstone-siltstone  units  are  folded;  they  have  a  well  developed  foliation  and  a  schistose 
texture. These units are highly altered, with chloritisation and sericitic alteration developed; and they 
are  weathered.  The  units  are  brecciated  (noted  in  the  drill  core)  and  occur  mainly  higher  in  the 
stratigraphy. The quartz veins are not frequent in these higher units.  
4.1.5 Laterite Profile  
This provides the cover for large amounts of the deposits visited. It is an iron-rich profile and forms in 
tropical to subtropical conditions, mainly on the surface of rocks due to their longer exposure to the 
atmosphere and the hydrosphere (Dequincey et al., 2006). These rocks that are covered by the laterite 
profile are hard, ferruginous and cemented (Bierschenk, 1968). 
18

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 4.3: The Sokadie Shear zone 
19

--- Page 26 ---
4.2 Structural Features 
4.2.1 Essakane 
The deformation event, D1, in the Essakane deposit is recognised by the development of a NNW-NW 
trending anticline (F1). The anticline is open, asymmetrical and verges to the SW (Fig. 4.4; 4.5). Due 
to  poor  exposure  few  measurements  were  obtained  for  the  south-west  limb,  but  that  limited  data 
suggests the limb trends NW and dips steeply SW.  The north-east dipping limb is shown on the equal 
area stereographic projection in Fig. 4.4, with a calculated mean of 325°/38°E. The facing of the limbs 
was  determined  using  graded  bedding  and  scour  and  fill  and  indicate  that  the  fold  is  an  inclined 
anticline. A palaeostress (δ1) applied from a north-eastern direction produced the asymmetry of the 
fold (Fig. 4.5).  
The  rock  units  are  cross-cut  by  quartz-carbonate  veins  which  include  extensional  veins,  conjugate 
veins,  bedding-parallel  veins  and  stockwork  veins.  An  equal  area  stereographic  projection  of 
conjugate  and  extensional veins  is  presented  in  Fig. 4.6  (a)  and  with  photograph  from  station  point 
N1591992; E0184823. The calculated mean for the extensional veins and conjugate veins in Essakane 
have  been  tentatively  determined  as  061°/82°S  and  164°/79°W,  respectively.  Based  on  the  data  the 
conjugate veins are oriented parallel to the fold axis and extensional veins are oriented perpendicular 
to the fold axis, with the palaeostress was tentatively interpreted to be in NE direction.  
The deformation event, D2, resulted in the development of a NE- trending, normal-slip fault with a 
mean direction of 300°/58° during the flexural-slip folding of the bedding and caused brecciation of 
the footwall sequence (Fig. 4.8). 
20

--- Page 27 ---
N 
Calculated mean: 325°/38°E 
NE dipping limb 
n=12 
Figure 4.4: Equal area stereographic projection of the Essakane bedding of NE dipping limb 
1m 
Figure  4.5:  Fold  axis  of  the  NW-trending  anticline  hosted  in  siltstone  in  the  Essakane  exploration  trench, 
crosscut by  extensional veins (black stiples) and sheeted veins (black stiples). 
21

--- Page 28 ---
N 
δ1 
Conjugate veins 
Extensional veins 
δ2 
S1 
(a) 
n=6 
1m 
(b) 
Figure  4.6:  (a)  Equal  area  stereographic  plot  of  the  conjugate  and  extensional  vein  sets  mapped  on  the 
Western wall of the Essakane pit (b)   
Normal –slip  
Fault 
Brecciated 
footwall 
Figure 4.7: NE-trending normal-slip fault in the exploration trench in Essakane (facing south-east).  
N 
3m 
22

--- Page 29 ---
4.2.2 Sokadie 
The metamorphic rocks in the Sokadie deposit are strongly deformed with well developed foliation, 
intersection lineation and crenulation cleavage. The structures mapped indicate that the deposit is in a 
shear zone. The shear zone is characterised by intensely foliated, crenulated, chloritised greenschist 
rocks.  The  greenschist  rocks  are  composed  of  quartz,  plagioclase,  epidote,  chlorite,  muscovite  with 
developed of arsenopyrite.  
The quartz-carbonate veins cross-cutting this unit are intensely folded and boudinaged, and brecciated 
buck quartz veins occur within the shear zone. The rock outcrops become progressively sheared when 
approaching  the  shear  zone  (towards  the  south).  The  foliation  of  the  rocks,  with  a  calculated  mean 
strike and dip of 078°/66°S, indicates that the shear zone is steeply dipping to the south with a NE-
trend (Fig 4.5). Crenulation cleavage, intersection lineation and S-C fabric were formed subsequent to 
the shearing. The sense of shear determined using the S-C fabric, boudins and quartz-carbonate veins 
is tentatively interpreted as dextral reverse.  
23

--- Page 30 ---
N 
Calculated mean: 078°/66°S 
n=13 
Figure 4.8: Equal area stereographic plot of foliation in the Sokadie shear zone 
24

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 5: Observations 
Mineralogy, Petrography and Ore petrology1 
5.1 Preamble 
Fifteen polished thin sections were analysed for this project, with five thin sections from each deposit. 
The  petrography  section  aims  to  realise  the  main  aims  and  objectives  of  the  project.  In  the  thin 
sections the rock types, mineralogy of the rocks, alteration types and microstructures were identified 
to determine a paragenetic sequence for the gold occurring in the Oudalan-Gorouol greenstone belt. 
The dominant sulphides included arsenopyrite and pyrite, with minor sphalerite, hematite, magnetite, 
chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite.  
5.2 Essakane 
The Essakane deposit is hosted in an inclined, asymmetrical NW-NNW trending anticline. The rock 
types that were identified in the thin sections are sandstone, siltstone, shale and volcaniclastics (Fig 
5.1).  These  rocks  are  constituted  by  a  number  of  minerals  that  are  common  across  the  Essakane 
deposit.  
The  arenaceous  sedimentary  units  i.e.  sandstone  and  siltstone,  are  dominated  by  common  rock 
forming  minerals  i.e.  quartz,  orthoclase,  plagioclase  and  biotite.  The  volcaniclastic  is  made  up  of 
volcanic  clasts,  quartz  and  feldspar  in  a  fine-grained  matrix.  The  samples  also  record  lithological 
contacts on a microscopic scale (Fig 5.2A).  
The  quartz  has  undulatory  extinction  with  sutured  grain  boundaries,  indicating  dissolution  and 
subsequent  overgrowth.  The  quartz  displays  a  ‘butterfly’  texture  (Fig.  5.3A,  B)  along  the  euhedral 
boundaries  of  the  sulphides,  it  is  the  quartz  is  strained  and  indicates  direction  of  compression.  The 
minerals  developing  next  are  elongated  hornblende  and  minor  biotite  <  2%.  These  are  altered  to 
chlorite. The hornblende is has two preferred mineral orientations and produces foliation in the rocks. 
The sample  EDD4-178B  consists  of  more  than  50% hornblende  and  it  is  termed  hornblendite  (Fig. 
5.2B).  
The secondary minerals that appear include muscovite, sericite, kaolinite and chlorite. These minerals 
form the wallrock alteration. The sericite is the most developed wallrock alteration (Fig. 5.4A) and it 
has preferred orientation i.e. it is cleaved. Muscovite occurs as needle-like blades with preferred linear 
orientation. The chlorite cross-cuts the all the minerals and has high iron content; it is found in the 
1 The oxide and sulphide textures depicted in the photomicrographs are found in all the deposits 
25

--- Page 32 ---
centre of the veins and in the distributed in the whole sample. The abundant chlorite may be due to 
biotite-chlorite  alteration  or  the  alteration  of  hornblende.  The  sheet  silicates  have  a  preferred 
orientation that produces a pronounced foliation (S1) in the rocks.  
The veins in the samples are quartz-ankerite veins and quartz-ankerite-chlorite veins; with chlorite in 
the centre (Fig. 5.4B). They form simple open-space fill morphology. The order of the minerals in the 
veins is quartz in contact with the wall rock, followed by ankerite with chlorite and sulphides at the 
centre.  The  veins  are  coarse-grained  texture  to  fine-grained  in  texture.  The  chlorite  and  sericite 
dominate the alteration zone that is enveloping the quartz veins. 
Three sulphides occur in the samples i.e. pyrite, chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite with the oxide phase as 
rutile.  Pyrite  is  most  common  and  occurs  as  both  euhedral  crystal  and  anhedral  masses,  and  it  is 
undergoing  supergene  alteration  to  marcasite.  Arsenopyrite  occurs  as  monoclinic  crystals  and  the 
chalcopyrite is anhedral. The chalcopyrite forms a small proportion of the sulphides in the Essakane 
samples ~1%. The arsenopyrite replaces the pyrite in these samples and occurs within the chlorite.  
Paragenesis of the sulphides: Pyrite- Chalcopyrite -Arsenopyrite 
26

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 5.1: Drill core photographs from the Essakane deposit of (a) shale+ volcaniclastic+ siltstone  
(b) 
volcaniclastic with sulphides (c) siltstone (d) shale with sulphides 
(Photographs courtesy of Prof Kim Hein) 
27

--- Page 34 ---
A 
B 
Volcaniclastic 
S1s 
Shale 
Zircon
S1s 
Siltstone 
S1s 
3 mm 
3 mm 
Figure 5.22:  (A) Photomicrograph illustrating the contacts lithological contacts with zircons in the shale & S1 
(B) Photomicrograph of hornblendite with two foliation directions 
2 Scale on photomicrographs indicates width of field of view 
28

--- Page 35 ---
A 
B 
Direction of applied stress 
1mm 
3 mm 
Figure 5.3: (A; B) Photomicrograph of ‘butterfly’ texture in quartz developing against sulphides 
29

--- Page 36 ---
A 
Chlorite ‘vein’ 
B 
Quartz-carbonate 
vein  
Sericite 
3 mm 
Chlorite 
3 mm 
Figure 5.4: (A) Photomicrograph of anomalous blue chlorite vein with sericitisation on the wall rock. (B) 
Photomicrograph illustrating chlorite within quartz-carbonate veins 
Chlorite 
30

--- Page 37 ---
5.3 Falagountou  
The sedimentary sequences of the Falagountou deposit are intruded by monzonites and monzodiorites 
(Fig  5.5).  These  rocks  are  alkaline  to  calc-alkaline  with  plagioclase  feldspars  and  alkali  feldspar 
making up a bulk of the mineralogy of the rocks. The alkaline intrusive rocks are quartz syenite and 
quartz monzonite. The samples are phaneritic and are composed of medium-grained to coarse-grained 
alkali feldspar (mainly orthoclase), plagioclase feldspar and quartz.   
The silicate mineralogy in the Falagountou deposit includes alkali feldspar, plagioclase, and quartz, 
with  muscovite,  epidote,  sericite,  chlorite,  biotite,  hornblende,  calcite  and  cordierite;  however  most 
dominant silicates found in the samples are feldspars, quartz and sericite. The two type of feldspars 
identified  are  alkali  feldspar  and  plagioclase.  The  alkali  feldspar  comprises  of  orthoclase  and 
microcline; and has a coarse-grained, equiangular texture. Grain boundaries in the feldspars have been 
dissolved and recystallised. The feldspars have a cloudy appearance and are altering to sericite (Fig. 
5.6A).  The  calcite  develops  in  the  wallrock  and  it  is  abundant  in  the  sample  with  a  proportion  of 
~20% in  each  sample.  Quartz  occurs in  smaller  proportions than feldspars.  It  is  polycrystalline  and 
subhedral, with sutured grain boundaries. The feldspars and quartz are in eutectic growth with each 
other.  
Sericite is the first alteration mineral to form and constitutes the groundmass. It is cleaved and has two 
preferred  orientations.  Muscovite  occurs  in  the  samples  as  elongate  crystals,  with  random  in  the 
igneous  rocks  and  linear  orientation  in  sedimentary  rocks.  Chlorite  forms  later  with  sulphides 
concentrated within the chlorite (Fig. 5.6B). 
The sulphides in the Falagountou deposit are arsenopyrite, pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite; and the 
oxides include hematite, magnetite and ilmenite. The hematite replaced the both magnetite (Fig. 5.7A, 
B)  and  arsenopyrite.  Magnetite  is  anhedral  with  exsolved  skeletal  ilmenite  developing  within  its 
structure; it may be a product of the alteration of biotite to chlorite or the replacement by muscovite. 
The presence of ilmenite is attributed to its tendency to be a common accessory  mineral in igneous 
rocks.  The  sphalerite  occurs  as  irregular  anhedral  masses  and  is  replaced  by  chalcopyrite.  The 
arsenopyrite is euhedral; and pyrite occurs as both euhedral crystals and anhedral masses. Free native 
gold  (Fig.  5.8A,  B)  was  observed  in a  sample  (FDD023-87),  the  grains  occur within  the  sericitised 
wallrock. 
Paragenesis of the sulphides: Pyrite-sphalerite- chalcopyrite-arsenopyrite 
          Magnetite-(ilmenite)- arsenopyrite??-hematite 
31

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 5.5: Drill core photographs from the Falagountou orpaillage (a) monzodiorite (b) monzonite (c) 
monzodiorite (d) shale (e) monzodiorite (although thin section indicates no feldspar present) 
(Photographs courtesy of Prof Kim Hein) 
32

--- Page 39 ---
A 
B 
Sericite 
1 mm 
Chloritisation-sulphidation 
1 mm 
Figure 5.6: (A) Photomicrograph of monzonite with intense sericitisation. (B) Photomicrograph of sulphides 
concentrated within the chlorite zone 
33

--- Page 40 ---
A 
B 
Mgt 
Hmt 
Hmt 
Mgt 
0.5 mm 
1 mm 
Figure 5.7: (A) Photomicrograph of magnetite altering to hematite in PPL (B) Photomicrograph of magnetite 
altering to hematite in XPL 
34

--- Page 41 ---
A 
B 
0.5 mm 
0.5 mm 
Figure 5.8: (A, B) Photomicrograph of free Au in Falagountou samples 
35

--- Page 42 ---
5.4 Sokadie 
Sokadie is a shear hosted deposit. The rocks are mainly greenschists i.e. quartz-plagioclase-chlorite-
muscovite  schist,  chlorite-mica  schist,  muscovite-quartz-chlorite  schist,  quartz-plagioclase-epidote 
schist,  quartz-chlorite-muscovite  schist  and  quartz-muscovite-plagioclase  schist)  (Fig.  5.9). 
Greenschist facies minerals dominate and include chlorite, sericite, epidote, actinolite and muscovite. 
Other minerals in the samples include quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, cordierite, biotite and calcite.  
The rocks are very fine-grained and foliated, with micaceous minerals having a preferred orientation. 
The first preferred orientation forms a crenulation cleavage in some samples and in other samples the 
orientation  is  linear.  The  veins  cross-cutting  these  rocks  are  folded.  S-C  fabric  is  evident  in  some 
samples (SOK02-50m); this is formed by the orientation of the minerals. The quartz in the sample is 
polycrystalline  and  has  pressure  solution,  and  it  is  in  eutectic  growth  with  the  orthoclase.  Calcite 
appears later, because it has not been affected by the deformation of the earlier minerals.  
The sulphides in the Sokadie are disseminated and include pyrite and arsenopyrite; and the oxides are 
hematite and magnetite. The pyrite in the samples occurs as anhedral masses with a few cubic crystals 
occurring (Fig 5.10A, B, C). The hematite occurs as a psuedomorph and replaces pyrite and fractured 
arsenopyrite (Fig. 5.11A, B, C). The magnetite is altered to hematite. In the sample SOK04-216mB, 
the pyrite is oriented along the crenulation cleavage.  
Paragenesis of the sulphides: anhedral pyrite-cubic pyrite-(magnetite)-arsenopyrite  
(a) 
(b) 
36

--- Page 43 ---
Figure 5.9: Drill core photographs of the Sokadie orpaillage (a) quartz-muscovite-plagioclase schist (b) quartz-
chlorite-muscovite schist (c) quartz-plagioclase-epidote-schist with folded quartz-carbonate vein (d) muscovite-
quartz-chlorite schist (e) chlorite-mica-schist 
(Photographs courtesy of Prof Kim Hein) 
37

--- Page 44 ---
A 
B 
Marcasite 
Aspy 
1 mm 
1 mm 
C 
3 mm 
Figure 5.10: Photomicrographs of different textures of pyrite grains (a) Anhedral pyrite masses (B) Pyrite 
altering to marcasite with subhedral arsenopyrite (C) Cubic pyrite 
(c) 
38

--- Page 45 ---
A 
B 
Aspy 
Fractures 
Hmt 
1 mm 
1 mm 
C 
1 mm 
Figure 5.11: Photomicrographs of arsenopyrite textures (A) Photomicrograph of arsenopyrite replaced by 
hematite (B) Photomicrograph of irregular   with arsenopyrite growth zoning and irregular overgrowths (C) 
Photomicrograph of euhedral arsenopyrite with ‘butterfly’ texture 
(a) 
39 
(a) 
(b)

--- Page 46 ---
Chapter 6: Discussion 
6.1 Discussion  
6.1.1 Depositional environment 
The deposition of supracrustal rocks includes sandstone, siltstone, shale, greywacke and volcaniclastic 
in  a sedimentary  basin. The  most  recognisable sedimentary  structures in  the  sedimentary  sequences 
are graded beds with a fining upwards sequence on a local scale, scour and fill and finely laminated 
sediments. On the basis of the sedimentary structures and laminations in the sediments, the sequences 
are  interpreted  to  have  deposited  in  a  low  energy  environment.  Mass flow  on  a continental  shelf is 
interpreted to be the mode of transport of the conglomerates observed by Tshibubudze, 2009 in the 
OGGB.  Based  on  the  limited  data  collected  for  the  sedimentary  structures,  the  depositional 
environment  is  tentatively  interpreted  shallow  marine  continental  shelf,  with  the  volcaniclastics 
derived from an adjacent volcanic arc. The interpretation is in accordance with the observations made 
by  Hein  et  al.  (2004)  for  the  Boromo-Goren  Greenstone  belt,  Roddaz  et  al.  (2007)  for  the  Upper 
Birimian and Tshibubudze et al. (2009) for the OGGB.  
6.1.2 Metamorphism 
The  supracrustal  rocks  were  regionally  metamorphosed  to  greenschist  facies,  characterised  by  the 
development  chlorite,  sericite,  muscovite  and  anhedral  pyrite,  which  formed  due  to  breakdown  of 
feldspars  into  sericite  combined  with  iron  from  iron-silicates  and  sulphur  (Stanton,  1972).  The 
supracrustal 
rocks  were  metamorphosed 
to  quartzite,  metavolcaniclastic,  metagreywacke, 
metasiltstone and  greenschists. The supracrustal rocks  are tentatively  interpreted  to  have  undergone 
two phases of deformation. The first deformation is associated with the development of NW-trending 
folds  (F1),  foliation  (S1)  and  extensional-conjugate  quartz-carbonate  vein  sets  (V1),  these  are 
interpreted as D1 (Tangaean) structures. The second deformation is associated with the development 
of  vein  stockwork  (V2),  NE-trending  faults,  NE-trending  foliation  (S2)  associated  with  the  dextral 
shear zones and are interpreted as D2 (Eburnean) structures. 
The  supracrustal  rocks  were  intruded  by  granitoid  plutons  and  prograde  contact  metamorphosed  to 
hornblende-hornfels  facies,  indicated  by  the  development  cordierite  spots,  amphiboles  and 
hornblende.  Leube  et  al.  (1990)  and  Tunks  et  al.  (2004)  recognised  the  low-  to  medium  grade 
amphibolite facies metamorphism of supracrustal rocks within the contact aureole of granitoids; Hein 
et  al.  (2004)  noted  the  development  of  hornblende-hornfels  facies  around  the  contact  aureole  of 
granitoids in the Boromo-Goren greenstone belt. Data for the size and mineralogy of the plutons was 
not  available,  but  they  are  interpreted  large,  calc-alkaline  plutons.  The  absence  of  minerals  kinked, 
40

--- Page 47 ---
zoned  biotite  and  tourmaline  in  the  samples  support  the  notion  that  the  supracrustal  rocks  are  not 
intrusion-hosted but proximal to the intrusions; hence the interpretation is that supracrustal rocks lie in 
the contact-aureole of granitoids.  
6.1.3 Alteration and mineralisation 
Alteration in supracrustal rocks is inferred to be concomitant to regional and contact metamorphism. 
Alteration  types  are  silicification, sericitisation, carbonatisation,  chloritisation  and  sulphidation. The 
fluids causing the alteration in the rocks are interpreted as derived from dewatering of sediments by 
compression  and  convective  currents  created  by  the  raised  geothermal  gradient  from  cooling  and 
recrystallisation of the plutons in proximity to the deposits (Fig 6.1). This phase is interpreted as the 
retrograde path of the contact metamorphism of the supracrustal rocks. Sericitisation of the wallrock 
occurred  first  and  is  recognised  by  alkali  metasomatism  forming  the  mineral  sericite.  The  mineral 
pyrite  occurred  in  the  form  of  anhedral  masses  as  minor  product  of  the  reaction  of  feldspars  to 
produce sericite (Robb, 2007). Subsequent to sericitisation, silicification appears through the addition 
of quartz in the wallrock. Quartz-carbonate veins are interpreted to be the result of silicification and 
carbonatisation of the sequences. These veins crosscut the lithology and they follow open-space fill 
morphology with the quartz rimming the outside of the veins and the ankerite developing towards the 
centre of the veins. Calcite is the product of later carbonatisation and is extensive in the wallrock of 
the  intrusions  in  Falagountou.  Sericitisation,  silicification  and  carbonatisation  are  tentatively 
interpreted as prograde reactions of contact metamorphism.  
Chloritisation  and  sulphidation  succeed  prograde  reactions.  This  alteration  is  characterised  by  the 
development  chlorite  and  epidote,  with  quartz-chlorite  veins  and  the  development  of  sulphides 
concentrated  within  chlorite.  The  interpretation  is  that  retrograde  reactions  resulted  in  these  low 
temperature minerals forming and overprinting the earlier high temperature minerals. This alteration 
is tentatively interpreted as the likely Au forming phase.  
The alteration sequence is as follows: 
    Sericitisation 
    Silicification 
   Silicification and carbonatisation 
  Carbonatisation 
  Chloritisation with silicification and sulphidation 
Time 
41

--- Page 48 ---
The sulphides in these deposits include pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and arsenopyrite. The sulphides 
are coarse-grained and disseminated. Sulphidation is synchronous with the chloritisation phase and is 
a  product  of  addition  of  Cu,  S,  As  and  Zn  during  hydrothermal  activity.  The  Au  is  intimately 
associated  with  the  mineral  arsenopyrite.  A  paragenetic  sequence  of  the  sulphides  was  determined 
from the replacement textures between the sulphides. It occurs as follows: 
    Pyrite 
Sphalerite 
Chalcopyrite 
Time 
Arsenopyrite (-Au) 
6.1.4 Timing of Gold mineralisation and genetic model 
According to Tshibubudze et al. (2009), the D1 and D2 events are both mineralised giving rise to two 
phases of gold mineralisation in the OGGB. The D1 is characterised by the metasomatic alteration of 
the wall rocks to form quartz vein hosted arsenopyrite-pyrite gold mineralisation and subsequent to 
׳
this  was  the  development of  vein-stockwork  mineralisation of  D2. The  V1  and V1
  observed in the 
Essakane deposit are interpreted to be mineralised during D1, with V2 mineralised during D2. The V2 
(stockwork veins) are typical of thermal-aureole vein assemblages noted by Wall (1991). The plutons 
intruding the OGGB are syn- to post Eburnean (Leube et al., 1990; Naba et al., 2004; Tshibubudze et 
al.,  2009)  and  this  provides  a  time  constraint  for  the  mineralisation  of  the  deposits.  A  tentative 
interpretation  is  that  the  Au  mineralisation  in  these  deposits  is  post-D1;  but  is  synchronous  to  D2, 
during the cooling of the granitoids. 
The Au mineralisation was formed by hydrothermal activity and is associated with the last phase of 
alteration identified in the samples, i.e. chloritisation. It is associated with contact metamorphism of 
granitoids. The Au forming stage is interpreted as a retrograde path during contact metamorphism, i.e.  
post  peak  thermal  metamorphism.  The  mineralisation  is  dominantly  a  quartz-chlorite-pyrite-
arsenopyrite  system.  Wall  and  Taylor  (1991)  observed  retrograde  mineralisation  in  the  thermal-
aureole of deposits at Victoria and Elsewhere, Australia. The stockwork vein system and disseminated 
sulphides  (mainly  pyrite-arsenopyrite  (Au))  typify  the  thermal-aureole  gold  deposits  identified  in 
Quigleys  and  Batman,  Australia  (Hein,  2003).  The  mineralisation,  i.e.  chlorite-epidote-pyrite-
arsenopyrite is located in the lower temperature field of the thermal aureole. The mineralisation in the 
OGGB is tentatively interpreted as orogenic under the subdivision of thermal-aureole gold.  
42

--- Page 49 ---
Essakane 
Plutons 
Falagountou 
Sokadie 
30 km 
Dori Batholith 
Figure 6.1: Aeromagnetic photograph of the study area indicating the locations of the plutons in the area 
(Photograph courtesy of A. Tshibubudze) 
43

--- Page 50 ---
Chapter 7: Conclusion 
The  rock  sequences  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone  belt  underwent  regional  metamorphism 
characterised by greenschist facies mineral assemblages, with the development of hornblende-hornfels 
assemblages  during  contact  metamorphism.  The  sequences  were  cross-cut  by  quartz  and  quartz-
carbonate  dominant  veins. The  events leading  up  to  the  formation  of the ore  can  be  summarised as 
follows: 
1.  The  deposition  of  lithologies  on  the  greenstone  belt,  which  include  interbedded  shale-
siltstone-sandstone and volcaniclastic sedimentary sequences.  
2.  The  regional  metamorphic  event  led  metamorphism  and  deformation  of  the  sequences, 
characterised  by  the  development  of  greenschist  facies  mineral  assemblages  and  NW-NNW 
trending structures (D1) and NE-NNE trending structures (D2). 
3.  The intrusion of granitoids during the Eburnean orogeny contact metamorphosed supracrustal 
rocks to hornblende-hornfels facies during the prograde path of metamorphism. 
4.  Heat  released  from  cooling  of  granitoids  remobilised  the  fluids  in  the  sediments  and 
introduced retrograde mineral assemblages. 
5.  Alteration  of  the  sequences  occurred  concurrent  to  metamorphism  resulting  in  the 
development  of  quartz,  quartz-chlorite  and  quartz-carbonate  veins.  The  precipitation  of 
sulphides  and  gold  followed  during  this  process.  Chloritisation  with  sulphidation  is 
interpreted as the Au forming phase. 
The  interpretation  of  the  data  indicates  that  the  deposits  of  Falagountou,  Essakane  and  Sokadie 
formed during the Eburnean orogeny subsequent to the intrusion and cooling of granitoid plutons. The 
mineralisation  occurred  during  post  peak  metamorphism  and  is  defined  by  chloritisation  of  the 
sequences.  The  mineralogy  indicates  that  the  deposits  are  situated  proximal  (middle-aureole)  to  the 
granitoids.  The  mineralisation  is  hosted  in  quartz-carbonate-chlorite  stockwork  veins.  Based  on  the 
previous discussion (Chapter 6) the deposits are tentatively classified as orogenic gold deposits under 
the subdivision of thermal-aureole gold deposits. 
44
