
--- Page 4 ---
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1.1: Map of Burkina Faso showing study area.  
Figure 1.2: Geological map of Burkina Faso showing study area (Hottin & Ouedraogo, 1992). 
Figure 2.1: Greenstone belts of Burkina Faso after Béziat et al. (2008). 
Figure 2.3.1: Flow diagram showing assessment of severity of degradation in the Save catchment. 
Figure  2.3.2:  Updated  national  road  network  map  overlaid  on  mosaiced  SPOT  satellite  images  of  the 
Kingdom of Swaziland. 
Figure 3.1: Mosaic of the six Landsat (RGB) 731 colour composite. 
Figure  3.2:  Aeromagnetic  data  A,  B,  C  with  total  magnetic  intensity  reduced  to  the  pole  1st  vertical 
derivative. D-represents overlay of the three magnetic data (A, B and C). 
Figure 3.3: A and C show radiometric data and B and D show inverted radiometric data. 
Figure 3.4: True colour composite image (RGB) 321. 
Figure 3.5: False colour composite 742 with rivers in blue, sand, minerals and soils in various colours and 
bare land in pink. Green show area of vegetation. 
Figure 4.1: Lineaments with E–W (ENE), N–S (NNW) and NE–SW trends. 
Figure 4.2: Distribution of greenstone belts, laterites and shear zones (Greenstone belts-green, laterites-
purple and shear zones in red). 
Figure  4.3. The  Boromo–Goren  Greenstone  Belt  (BGGB)  of  Burkina  Faso,  together  with  the  Bouroum 
and Yalogo greenstone belts Hein et al. (2004). 
Figure 4.4: RGB 742 showing sand dunes in light green on the image. 
Figure 4.5: Outcrop locations in grey. 
Figure 4.6: Sharp lithological contacts (orange). 
Figure 4.7: A-RGB 432 false colour composite with areas of healthy and dense vegetation shown in red 
and  areas  of  less  vegetation  shown  in  light  right.  Rivers  are  marked  in  blue  and  cities  (City  of 
Ouagadougou) in cyan blue (B) and drainage systems are shown in red indicating that there is vegetation 
along the river (B). 
Figure 4.8: Locality map of Burkina Faso showing cities, towns, villages and roads. 
Figure 4.9: interpretation of magnetic data. (Green- lineaments and black-areas of shear). 
Figure 4.10: A- normal radiometric data and B- inverted radiometric data. Black- Lineaments, Red- areas 
of shear. 
4

--- Page 5 ---
Figure 5.1:  Interpretative geology map of the Markoye Shear Zone based on combined regional magnetic 
data  (RTP  and  RTP  1st  vertical  derivative),  Landsat  imagery,  with  Landsat  image  p194r050_741  as 
underlay (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). 
Figure 5.2: Strato-tectonic-magmatic map of Burkina Faso with distribution of structures and lithology. 
5

--- Page 6 ---
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 3.1: Satellite imagery type and georeference system used. 
Table 3. 2 (a): Landsat 7 characteristics. 
Table 3. 2 (b): Band characteristics. 
6

--- Page 7 ---
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
The following abbreviations are used: 
GIS- Geographic Information System 
RGB-Red, Green, Blue 
TTG- Tonalite Tronjomite Granodiorite 
OGGB- Oudalan-Gorouol Greenstone Belt 
BGGB- Boroum-Goren Greenstone Belt 
GGB- Goren Greenstone Belt 
MSZ- Markoye Shear Zone 
SSZ- Sabce Shear Zone 
BSZ- Belahouro Shear Zone 
FCC- False Colour Composite 
7

--- Page 10 ---
ABSTRACT 
Satellite  images  are  among  continuous  sources  of  digital  data  for  mapping  geological  structures, 
lithologies  and  for  human  geography  studies.    In  this  study,  a  strato-tectonic-magmatic  map  of  NE 
Burkina Faso was created using Landsat 7 imagery combined with radiometric and magnetic data.  Four 
different  false  color  composite  images  of  Landsat  data  (FCC  731,742,753  and  432)  RGB  images  were 
generated and evaluated for lithological mapping and human geography studies. A false color composite 
image of Landsat data 731 (RGB) was generated and used for production of the strato-tectonic-magmatic 
map for the study area. Analysis of geological structures such as lineaments, shear zone, dykes, plutons 
and lithological discrimination as well as geographic features was carried out using IDRISI Kilimanjaro 
software and CorelDraw X3 ® software packages.  
Throughout  this  study  Landsat  data  731(RGB)  was  used  for  extraction  process.  From  this  study  it  was 
found that  the  study  area  is  dominated by  NE-NNW  trending  shear  zones,  NW trending  dykes  and  the 
extracted lineament trends are east to ENE, north to NNW and NEasterly. There are four greenstone belts 
in the study area and these are underlain by laterite. Sand dunes cover most of the northern Burkina Faso. 
The features extracted from the Landsat 7 were also evident in, magnetic and radiometric data. Landsat 7 
imagery can be used successfully for geological mapping. 
10

--- Page 11 ---
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Preamble 
Most geological maps of Burkina Faso are outdated and due to high cost of aerial photography the maps 
have not been updated. There is massive investment in exploration in NE Burkina Faso and there are few 
geological maps that assist in targeting, with the latest being completed by Castaing in 2003.  Therefore a 
GIS  interpretation  was  undertaken  to  create  a  strato-tectonic-magmatic  map  for  the  area.  GIS 
interpretation has become the most important modern tool for geological interpretation and a fundamental 
approach in grassroots exploration for the delineation of resource potential. It involves the breaking up of 
complex  data  planes  into  simpler  and  more  interpretable  forms  related  to  geological  features.  Remote 
sensing analysis from GIS is used to extract drainage and topographic patterns, curvilinear features and 
stands of lithologically related vegetation (Drury, 1987).  As such, remote sensing techniques have great 
utility  in  lithologic  discrimination,  outcrop  delineation  and  production  of  geological  maps  at  different 
scales (Qari et al 2008). 
This study focused on the identification of various lithological units using Landsat images with the aim of 
using  them  as  part  of  a  dataset for  mineral  (gold and  other  mineral commodities)  potential targeting  in 
Burkina  Faso,  mapping  of  geological  structures  and  also  land  use/cover  data  sets.  This  was  completed 
using  six  Landsat  images,  radiometric  and  magnetic  data.  The  images  will  be  georeferenced  using 
geographic  coordination  systems  or  projections.  Based  on  the  spectral  capabilities  of  Landsat  7  image 
data, the RGB (Red, Green, and Blue) band combination was prepared for discrimination of geological 
features  (lithology,  structure  and  contacts).  Although  the  spectral  capabilities  of  Landsat  data  do  not 
provide new information on lithology, they are useful for extracting geological features that might have 
not been defined by field studies and aerial photography or maps in the area.  
1.2 Location and physiography 
The study area for the project is north east Burkina Faso. Burkina Faso is a landlocked country located in 
western  Africa,  north  of  Ghana  (Fig  1.1).  It  shares  borders  with  six  countries  namely  Benin  in  the 
southeast, Ivory Coast in the south west, Togo and Ghana in the south, Mali in the north and Niger in the 
east.  It  has  an  area  of  274.200  km2  and  an  annual  population  growth  of  2.7%.The  capital  city  is 
Ouagadougou. The official language is French and regional languages include Dioula and Mooré.  
11

--- Page 12 ---
Land  use  can  be  divided  into  three  sections:  arable  land  (17.66%),  which  is  mainly  land  cultivated  for 
crops  that  are  replanted  after  each  harvest  (e.g.  rice,  maize,  wheat),  permanent  land  (0.22%),  which  is 
cultivated land that cannot be replanted after harvest(e.g. coffee, rubber ) and other land (82.12%) which 
includes  pastures,  woodland,  forest,  built-on  areas,  barren  lands  and  roads.  The  land  surface  is  mainly 
defined  by  alluvial  plains,  low  hills,  and  sand  dunes  of  the  Sahara  Desert.  Landforms  in  Burkina  Faso 
include lakes, rivers, mountains and wetlands. In the north and east of the country vegetation consists of 
acacia  woodland  and  scrub,  expanding  into  semi-desert  in  the  dry  season  in  the  north.  The  rest  of  the 
country’s  vegetation  is  sparse  savanna  grasslands  as  well  as  dry  forest  areas  with  occasional  shrub 
vegetation or acacia. The country has a subtropical sahelian climate with two distinct seasons, i.e. rainy 
season and dry season.  
Study area 
Figure 1: Map of Burkina Faso showing study area. 
     Figure 1.1: Map of Burkina Faso showing study area.  
1.3 Problem statement 
Most geological maps of Burkina Faso are outdated and due to high cost of aerial photography the maps 
have  not  been  updated,  this  research  will  test  whether  GIS  interpretation  techniques  can  be  used  for 
geological mapping using Landsat, magnetic and radiometric and to update the geological map of Burkina 
Faso. 
12

--- Page 13 ---
1.4 Aims and Objectives 
The aim of the project is to create a strato-tectonic-magmatic map of  NE Burkina Faso for exploration 
targeting.  The  map  will  be  created  using  six  Landsat  images,  magnetic  &  radiometric  data.  Using  the 
imagery  it  will  be  possible  to  extract  geological  boundaries  (lithological  contacts),  structures,  dykes, 
lineaments, land use and land cover datasets. Through doing this work knowledge about GIS and Remote 
sensing will be gained. 
1.5 Research questions 
Are GIS and/or Remote sensing good for geological mapping and effective? 
13

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 1.2: Geological map of Burkina Faso showing study area (Hottin & Ouedraogo, 1992) 
14

--- Page 15 ---
CHAPTER 2: REGIONAL GEOLOGY 
2.1 Stratigraphy 
The  lithostratigraphy  in  north-eastern  Burkina  Faso  is  defined  by  NE-trending  Birimian  meta-
volcaniclastic  greywacke  and  intercalated  meta-conglomerate,  siltstone  and  shale  (Figure  1.  2).  The 
Birimian stratigraphy was divided into two parts by Junner (1935; 1940) in (Leube et al., 1990), the lower 
Birimian series and the upper Birimian series. The lower Birimian series is predominantly sedimentary in 
origin  and  includes  dacitic/rhyodacitic  meta-volcaniclastic  sediments,  meta-greywacke  with intercalated 
black meta-siltstone and manganiferous chert, argillite, shale and chemical meta-sedimentary (Feybesse et 
al., 1990; Leube et al., 1990; Hirdes et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1991). The upper Birimian series consists 
of metamorphosed basic and intermediate lavas and pyroclastic rocks (Feybesse et al., 1990; Leube et al., 
1990; Hirdes et al., 1996; Milési et al., 1991, 1992; Naba, 2004; Tshibubudze et al., 2009). The Birimian 
sequences  were  metamorphosed  during  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  and  were  intruded  by  numerous  calc-
alkaline  plutons  including  tonalite  (TTG),  granodiorite,  diorite  and  meta-diorite  bodies  that  are 
collectively  termed  the  Eburnean  granitoids  (Pons  et  al.,  1995;  Naba  et  al.,  2004;  Pawlig  et  al.,  2006). 
Lateritic profiles cover much of the West African craton.  
The  Birimian  sequences  were  metamorphosed  during  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  where  the  meta-
volcanic  and  metasedimentary  rocks  were  subjected  to  crustal  shortening  associated  with  greenschist 
facies  regional  metamorphism  (Oberthur  et  al.,  1998)  and  by  further  metamorphism  related  to  the 
intrusion  of  granitoids  (Milesi  et  al.,  1989,  1991;  Bossiére  et  al.,  1996;  Hirdes  et  al.  1996;  Hein  et  al., 
2004).  Metamorphic  grade  includes  greenschist  facies  with  formation  of  dominant  chloride–muscovite 
mineral  assemblage  and  abundant  hornblende  and  andalusite  mineral  assemblages  which  are  low  to 
medium grade amphibolites facies (Bossiére et al., 1996; Béziat et al., 2000; Naba et al., 2004; Pawlig et 
al., 2006). 
The Tarkwa Group unconformably overlies the Birimian sequence (Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 
1992;  Castaing  et  al.,  2003).  It  has  been  divided  into  three  units:  the  Banket  Series,  Phyllite  Unit  and 
Meta-Sandstone unit. There is further division into the Banket quartz lithic meta-sandstone unit and the 
Banket meta-conglomerate unit of the Banket series (Tunks et al., 2004). 
15

--- Page 16 ---
2.2 Structures 
In NE Burkina Faso there are four greenstone belts, of which three have been studied, namely, the 
Goren  and  Oudalan-Gorouol  greenstone belts (Fig.  2.1)  which have  been  studied  by  Hein  et  al.  (2004) 
Hein  et  al.  (2010)  and  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  and  the  Yalogo  greenstone  belt  which  has  not  been 
studied to date. 
Figure 2.1: Greenstone belts of Burkina Faso after Béziat et al. (2008) 
The Oudalan–Gorouol greenstone belt (OGGB) hosts gold deposits at Essakane, Gossey, Korizena 
and  Falagountou  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2010).  In  the  OGGB,  the  Birimian  supracrustal  sequences  are 
dominated  by  meta-volcaniclastic  greywacke  that  is  intercalated  with  meta-conglomerate,  siltone  and 
shale, carbonate (dolomite) and volcanic units (pillow lavas). The OGGB is surrounded by plutonic rocks 
including granite, TTG suite granitoids and granite gneiss (Tshibubudze et al., 2010). It is crosscut by the 
NNE trending Markoye Shear Zone, NE trending Tin Takanet-Bellekcire Shear Zone, westerly trending 
16

--- Page 17 ---
Dori Shear Zone, north trending Kargouna Shear Zone, Takabougou Shear Zone and Bom Kodjelé Shear 
Zone (Tshibubudze et al., 2010). 
The  Goren  Greenstone  Belt  (GGB)  forms  part  of  the  largest  Boromo-Goren  Greenstone  Belt 
(BGGB) .The GGB segment of the BGGB trends SE across the Yatenga, Bam, and Sanmatenga districts 
(Hein et al., 2004). In the GGB there are two Birimian formations: the Lower and Upper Birimian which 
are described based on studies done by Attoh (1982) and Feybesse et al. (1990) and craton-scale studies 
by Milési et al. (1989), Abouchami et al. (1990), Hottin and Ouedraogo (1992)  and Boher et al (1992). 
The studies indicate that the  
1) Lower Birimian which includes a volcano-sedimentary package with intercalated fluvial deltaic meta-
sediments is unconformably overlain by the: 
2) Upper Birimian which is a volcanic-volcanoclastic package.  
Further investigations on lithologies and structures completed by  Hein et al. 2004 at Sanmatenga 
district  indicate  that  the  deposition  of  the  volcanic,  metasedimentary  and  turbidic  rocks  in  the  Gorem 
segment  of  the  BGGB  is  in  three  conformable  successions:  a  lower  volcano-  sedimentary  succession, 
mafic-intermediate  volcanic  succession,  and an  upper  volcano-sedimentary  succession. The  successions 
indicate  interplay  of  marine-deltaic  sedimentary  processes  and  volcanic  activity.  The  deposition  was 
interpreted to have occurred within a marginal marine setting adjacent to an emergent volcanic centre or 
island arc setting (Hein et al., 2004).  The conformable nature (angular unconformity) of the successions: 
the 1) Lower Birimian and 2) Upper Birimian does not provide any case of separation into two formations 
in the Sanmatenga district described from previous studies by Attoh (1982) and Feybesse et al., (1990). 
The  Birimian  Bouroum-Yalogo  greenstone  belt  is  a  Y-shaped  terrane  located  between  large 
Eburnean  granitoid  batholiths  200  km  northeast  of  Ouagadougou  (Ducellier  1963).  It  consists  of:  (1) 
metagranites,  metagabbro-diorites  and  metaquartzite  of  the  Bamga  series  (Hottin  and  Ouedraogo  1976; 
Sawadogo 1983; Zonou, 1987) interpreted as early Birimian and dated at 2. 18 Ga (Boher et al. 1992); (2) 
overlying  mafic  lava  flows  and  pillow  lavas  (Zonou  et  al.,1985)  with  associated  pyroclastites, 
volcaniclastic rocks and immature sediments  mainly at lower levels and calc-alkaline andesite, dacite and 
lamprophyre  at  upper  levels,  all  affected  by  a  greenschist-facies  metamorphism;  and  (3)  basic  to 
intermediate plutons later emplaced. 
Markoye Shear zone 
In  the  NE  Burkina  Faso  the  Palaeoproterozoic  Birimian  Domain  of  the  West  African  Craton  is 
crosscut by the NE-trending Markoye Shear Zone (MSZ) which is a first crustal scale structure. The MSZ 
marks  the  western  boundary  of  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  Greenstone  Belt  which  extends  into  the  Niger 
17

--- Page 18 ---
(Tshibubudze et al., 2009). The MSZ has undergone at least two phases of reactivation which happened at 
the same time as two phases of regional deformation. The first deformation, D1 resulted in the formation 
of  NNW-NW  trending  folds  and  thrusts  during  dextral-reverse  displacement  of  the  MSZ.  The  second 
deformation, D2 involved a period of SE-NW crustal shortening and sinistral-reverse displacement on the 
MSZ and is correlated to the Eburnean Orogeny approximately 2.1 Ga (Tshibubudze et al., 2009).  
Sabce Shear Zone 
The Sabce Shear Zone (SSZ) is a NE trending sinistral-reverse shear zone. It is represented by a 
branch  of  the  main  zone  at  Tangapella.  The  branch  consists  of  an  array  of  interconnected  sub-shears 
trending NE. The sub-shears crosscut and offset all the lithologies, F1 folds and D1 boudins at Tangapella 
area (Hein, 2010). 
Belahouro Shear Zone 
The Belahouro Shear Zone (BSZ) is a mineralised NNW trending shear zone. It is modelled as a 
back structure to the major NNE trending Markoye Shear Zone (Middleton et al., 1997)).  The Belahouro 
Shear  Zone  is  mineralised and  is  considered  a  prospective  exploration  target.  Basalt and  volcanoclastic 
within the NE portion of the region have a sheared contact and provide a lithological contrast (Middleton 
et al., 1997). 
Laterites (Ferricrete) 
An  extensive  residual  laterite  cap  exists  in  the  study  area  (Hein.  2008).  Laterite  is  an  iron-rich 
profile that is developed under tropical to sub-tropical condition due to long term exposure of rocks to the 
atmosphere and hydrosphere in tectonically stable areas (Dequincey et al., 2006).The ferricrete is matrix 
to  clast  supported  and  typically  contains  clasts  and  rock  fragments  of  the  underlying  stratigraphy 
(Middleton et al., 1997) and is currently forming in lowland areas.  The general outcrop distribution of 
ferricrete indicate that, the ferricrete has been eroded, deposited and cemented several times such that the 
current  ferricrete  profile  is  representative  of  several  phases  of  ferricrete  formation  (Middleton  et  al., 
1997). Studies done by Hein, 2008 in the Yatenga District show that ferricrete has a negative correlation 
with master joints. Using 10Be and 26Al isotopic depletion ratios of laterite, Brown et al. (1994) concluded 
that in-situ laterite in Burkina Faso formed during the upper Cretaceous to Eocene. 
2.3. Case studies 
The following case studies helped in choosing the methodology for this project. 
18

--- Page 19 ---
2.3.1  Assessment  of  land  degradation  in  the  save  catchment  of  Zimbabwe  by  Julia  Mambo  and  Emma 
Archer, 2007. 
Methodology 
The  methodology  involves  Buhera  Straddles  three  landsat  satellite  scenes  namely  169/74,169/73 
and  168/74.Two  sets  of  the  three  Landsat  TM  and  ETM  scenes  for  the  years  1992  and  2002  were 
georeferenced using image to image rectification with SPOT images projected in UTM, (Zone 365) and 
referenced onto the WGS 84 ellipsoid. An average of 12 ground control points per image were used; with 
a  residual  error  of  approximately  2.1  metres.  The  three  scenes  were  mosaiced  and  an  image  enclosing 
Buhera  district  was  extracted,  upon  which  subsequent  image  processing  was  undertaken.  Two  bands  3 
and 4 were used for change detection analysis. 
Summary of methodology is displayed in the following diagram 
Figure 2.3.1: Flow diagram showing assessment of severity of degradation in the Save catchment. 
2.3.2 Map updating using high resolution satellite imagery: A case of the kingdom of Swaziland, 2002. 
A case study of the Kingdom of Swaziland on map updating using high resolution satellite imagery 
was completed because the map for the area is old, outdated and largely exist in analogue form. This work 
19

--- Page 20 ---
was  undertaken  by  W.  Ottichilo  and  E.  Khamala.  The  country  is  covered  by  fourteen  spot  satellite 
imagery scene, four landsat TM satellite image scene and thirty-five 1:50000 topographic maps.  
Methodology used high resolution remote sensing and GIS. This was implemented in  five stages. 
These include: 
1.  Preliminary image interpretation: This involved classifying and interpretation. Preliminary maps 
were  produced  from  colour,  tone,  pattern,  texture,  association,  shape,  size,  shadows  and  size 
enabled photomorphic delineation of line and polygon. 
2.  Field observation: sample points were selected from preliminary interpretation. 
3.  Final  image  interpretations  were:  field  work  findings  were  incorporated  to  refine  both  the 
preliminary classification systems and preliminary image interpretation. This stage involved re-
labelling and redrawing of certain feature boundaries to give the actual representation as revealed 
from fieldwork exercises. 
4.  Quality control: This stage involved cross-checking the feature boundaries to ensure accurate and 
consistent  interpretation.  Confirmation  of  feature  codes/labels,  polygon  closures,  line  feature 
continuity  among  topological  issues  .After  approval  final  interpretation  would  proceed  for 
digitization.  
5.  Digitization of final interpretation: this was done on a scene by scene and theme to theme basis 
using ArcInfo, ArcView GIS Software. Land use and land cover polygons, hydrological features 
and the road network were digitized as independent thematic layers. Each thematic layer was then 
edited  to  eliminate  digitization  errors  and  thereafter  coded  and  Georeferenced.  Adjacent  digital 
themes were edge matched and joined together to produce single nationwide thematic mosaics of 
the  entire  kingdom  of  Swaziland.  Using  ArcView,  all  the  different  national  map  layers  were 
overlaid to produce a single multi-thematic map of Swaziland with scale of 1:250000. 
From the methodology the following results were obtained: 
National  map  of  kingdom  of  Swaziland  was  produced  using  SPOT  satellite  imagery  at  scale  of 
1:250  000.  The  map  carried  eight  land  use/  land  cover  classes,  hydrological  features,  transportation 
infrastructure,  towns  and  administrative  boundaries.  A  rich  GIS  database  containing  both  spatial  and 
aspatial information was developed. Satellite image interpretation accuracy was 80% indicating that the 
methodology is robust and reliable if well executed. 
20

--- Page 21 ---
Figure  2.3.2:  Updated  national  road  network  map  overlaid  on  mosaiced  SPOT  satellite  images  of  the 
Kingdom of Swaziland. 
2.3.3 Photo geology presented by Drury, 1987. 
Methodology 
The methodology deals with extraction of geological structures to produce geological maps from 
aerial photos and satellite images. The following criteria are used to extract data: Colour and colour tones, 
topography  and  geometry,  stream  drainage  patterns,  vegetation  anomalies.  IDRISI  software  package, 
remote sensing and GIS are used considering the following four criteria: 
21

--- Page 22 ---
1.  Structural interpretation-  determination  of  geomorphology,  lineaments  and line  features,  faults  and 
folds, vegetation anomalies and drainage patterns. 
2.  Petrographic/lithologic  interpretation-  determination  of  rock  types  and  boundaries  of  geological 
formations. 
3.  Using IDRISI colour & colour tones show shapes and sizes of features. 
-Shape is the geometric outline of an object and it gives information about the nature and geometry 
of the object. 
-size is the magnitude of an object or a single dimension of an object. 
The geological interpretation of imagery 
Colour and tones give brightness levels in digital images and reflection of colour tones of different 
materials  on  the  earth  helps  to  distinguish  different  materials  and  their  boundaries  e.g.  water  can  be 
distinguished  from  soil  since  water  has  a  different  tone  than  soil  (Lillesand  &  Kiefer,  1994;  Konecny 
2002; Prost, 2001).  
2.3.4 Mapping land use/ cover distributions on a mountainous tropical island using remote sensing and 
GIS by Serwan M. J. Baban and Kamaruzaman Wan Yusuf, 2001 
Study area: Langkawi Islands 
Data collection and methodology 
The study area has a Landsat TM satellite image for Langkawi Island, acquired on March 1995 was 
analysed using IDRISI, a raster-based GIS software program. Image was atmospherically corrected using 
the  darkest  pixel  approach  and  geocorrected  with  a mean  square  (RMS)  error of  less  than  half a  pixel. 
Using IDRISI, with composite images of the bands TM3, TM4 and TM5 an unsupervised classification of 
land use/cover was performed on the basis of spectral signatures for nine clustering areas. Secondary data 
was used to support this work. This consisted of a 1990 topographic map of scale 1:500 000, 1990 land 
use map of scale 1:150 000 and 1986 map at scale 1:100 000 and ground truth data from 255 sampled 
points.  This  was  followed  by  a  supervised  classification  for  land  use/cover  where  training  sites  were 
selected on the basis of the unsupervised classified image. 
 Using  IDRISI,  the  polygons  around  each  training  area  were  digitized  and  assigned  a  unique 
identifier  each  cover  type;  a  spectral  signature  for  each  class  was  created.  Thematic  content  of  the 
classified  image  was  quantitavely  assessed  for  accuracy  by  evaluating  the  correspondence  between  the 
class label assigned to a pixel in the image and true class as measured on ground. A direct comparison of 
22

--- Page 23 ---
classes  was  carried  out  based  on  geographical  location  with  the  available  primary  and  secondary  data. 
Most of the classes were easily separated and mapped due to their distinctive reflectance signatures within 
the  TM  bands  used;  their  confinement  of  different  parts  of  the  area  was  based  mainly  on  topography. 
Overall accuracy of the method was 90%. 
23

--- Page 26 ---
Figure 3.1: Mosaic of the six Landsat (RGB) 731 colour composite. 
3.1.3 Aeromagnetic data 
The aeromagnetic data has total magnetic intensity reduced to the pole 1st vertical derivative with 
NW  shading  UTM  Zone  30N.  Three  images  making  the  magnetic  data  will  be  used  (figure  3).  These 
images will be overlain using CorelDraw X3 ® software. 
26

--- Page 27 ---
Figure  3.2:  Aeromagnetic  data  A,  B,  C  with  total  magnetic  intensity  reduced  to  the  pole  1st  vertical 
derivative. D-represents overlay of the three magnetic data (A, B and C). 
3.1.4 Radiometric data 
Total K-Th-U RGB data for NE Burkina Faso was used. Due to the image being cut off only few parts of 
the image making the study area will be used. There are two images making the radiometric data (figure 
4) and using CorelDraw X3 ® Software the two image in figure 4 A and C were inverted. 
27

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 3.3: A and C show radiometric data and B and D show inverted radiometric data. 
3.2. Image processing and classification 
3.2.1 Bands combinations 
The Landsat imagery bands of p194r050, p194r051, p194r052, p195r050, p195r051 and p195r052 
were  used  for  band  combinations.  RGB  colour  combination  images  using  Landsat  data  were  selected 
primarily  on  the  basis  of  reflectance  spectra  of  dominant  rock  types.  The  original  image  bands  were 
displayed  in  an  RGB  colour  composite  in  order  to  detect  the  best  combination  that  shows  more 
information  of  geological  features  of  the  study  area  (Fig.  1).  The  band  combination  321  (RGB)  were 
displayed for true colour visual analysis of geological features (Figure 5). The false colour composite 742 
in  an  RGB  was  displayed  in  order  to  enhance  the  interpretation  and  visual  analysis  of  geological 
structures  shown  by  the  band  combination  321.  The  false  colour  composite  742  (Figure  6)  has  the 
advantage  of  preserving  morphological  features  as  well  as  displaying  different  lithological  units  in 
different colours because of the use of near and mid infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectra (Peña 
and  Abdelsalam,  2006).    A  false  colour  composite  with  band  combination  (RGB)  7  3  1  was  used  to 
28

--- Page 29 ---
display differences in rock types (Figure 1). False colour composite with band combination (RGB) 432 
was used to delineate the human geography. False colour composite with band combination (RGB) 753 
can be used to find textural and moisture of soils and can be useful for geological studies. All the band 
combinations were created using IDRISI Kilimanjaro software package by running Composite from the 
display menu and assigning the bands to RGB composite. 
True colour composite (RGB) 321 
In  a  True  Color  composite,  the  visible  bands  are  selected  and  assigned  to  their  corresponding 
colours  to  obtain  an  image  that  approximates  true  color.  The  visible  bands  approximate  the  range  of 
vision for the human eye, and hence they appear to be close to what we would expect to see in a normal 
photograph.    True  color  tends  to  appear  flat  and  have  low  contrast  due  to  the  Electromagnetic  (EM) 
radiation in the blue visible region being more susceptible to atmospheric scattering. 
29

--- Page 30 ---
Figure 3.4: True colour composite image (RGB) 321 
30

--- Page 31 ---
False colour composite 742 
This band combination provides imagery for desert regions and for the purpose of the project it will 
be used to extract sand dunes. Sands, soils and minerals are highlighted in different colours. Areas with 
bright green indicate healthy vegetated areas while area in light green represents grass lands. Pink areas 
represents barren soil, urban areas are represented in magenta. 
Figure 3.5: False colour composite 742 with rivers in blue, sand, minerals and soils in various colours and 
bare land in pink. Green show area of vegetation. 
31

--- Page 32 ---
3.3 Extraction of geological features 
CorelDraw X3 ® software was used to extract different features including lineaments, shear zones, 
sand dunes, plutons, granodiorites and greenstone belts. Six images from the study area with False Colour 
Composite  and    RGB  731  band  combination  were  combined  to  form  a  mosaic  using  CorelDraw  X3 ® 
software. The extraction process took five weeks to complete because of the large size of the images and 
time was needed to zoom to features to see them clearly. Magnetic and radiometric data were also used in 
this  process.  Three  images  of  the  aeromagnetic  data  were  overlain  in  CorelDraw  to  extract  large 
geological  features.  The  two  images  making  the  radiometric  data  were  also  used  for  this  process  of 
extraction but due to the fact that only a portion of the study area is covered by the currently available 
radiometric data, few features could be extracted. 
32

--- Page 33 ---
CHAPTER 4: EXTRACTION 
The extraction process for NE Burkina Faso helped in constraining the position of plutons, dykes, 
lithologies,  lineaments,  laterites  and  shears  in  the  study  area.  LANDSAT  7  data  provided  useful 
constraints on surface lineaments, the distribution of laterites, drainage systems and human geography. 
4.1 Extraction of geological features using LANDSAT 7 (RGB) 731 FCC 
Plutons 
Plutonic rocks surround the greenstone belts, and are pink in image colour. There is no development of 
shears  on  the  plutonic  rocks.  It  can  be  concluded  that  the  plutons  postdate  shearing.  The  plutons  have 
almost circular shapes and their boundaries were easy to define. 
Lineaments 
A  lineament  analysis  using  LANDSAT  7  731  FCC  and  to  a  limited  extent,  aeromagnetic  data,  was 
completed to establish the dominant trend of lithologies, and shears. The lineaments were extracted from 
river drainages were the river was flowing in a straight line, since the river doesn’t flow in a straight line 
there must have been a linear feature making it to flow in a straight line or causing it to change its course 
of flow. Most of the rivers in the imagery have the same trends as the lineaments. The lineaments trends 
(Fig 4.1). 
1. East to ENE,  
2. North to NNW  
3. NEasterly  
33

--- Page 34 ---
Figure 4.1: Lineaments interpreted from 731 FCC, lineaments trend east to ENE, north to NNW and NE. 
Laterite (Ferricrete)  
An extensive residual laterite cap exists in the study area. Dykes north of the Burkina Faso are skirted by 
laterite. Laterite covers greenstone belts. Age of the laterite is cretaceous. 
Shear zones and greenstone belt 
The NNE trending MSZ clearly  mark the boundary of the OGGB as interpreted by Tshibubudze et al., 
(2009).  The  OGGB  is  surrounded  by  plutonic  rocks  as  documented  by  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  (2010.  The 
shear  zones  are  marked  in  red  (Fig.  4.2).  The  NE  trending  SSZ  cuts  the  GGB  and  the  Bouroum 
greenstone  belt  is  cut  by  the  BSZ  which  is  NW  trending  as  shown  on  fig  4.2  and  fig.  4.3.  All  the 
greenstone belts on the image have an orange-brownish colour and have laterite caps. The GGB is cut by 
34

--- Page 35 ---
major  joints  with  different  trends.  The  greenstone  belts  extracted  are  larger  in  dimension  than  those 
documented  on  Figure  1.2,  and  this  can  help  in  increasing  Gold  exploration  since  most  of  the  major 
discoveries of gold are found on the greenstone belts. New greenstone belts were found, these have the 
same signature (colour and laterite caps) as the already known greenstone belts. 
Figure 4.2: Distribution of greenstone belts, laterites and shear zones (Greenstone belts-green, laterites-
purple and shear zones in red). 
35

--- Page 36 ---
Figure  4.3: The  Boromo–Goren  Greenstone  Belt  (BGGB)  of  Burkina  Faso,  together  with the  Bouroum 
and Yalogo greenstone belts Hein et al. (2004). 
36

--- Page 37 ---
Dykes 
The dykes are predominantly NW-trending and are inferred to be dolerite in composition. The dykes are 
not continuous and hard to trace.  
Sand dunes 
Two images (p194r050 and p195r050) from the false colour composite 742 were used to delineate sand 
dunes  (Fig.  4.4).  On  the  image  they  are  light  green  since  they  occur  in  areas with  less  vegetation.  The 
sand dunes only cover the northern part of Burkina Faso, they form part of the Sahara desert. 
Figure 4.4: RGB 742 showing sand dunes in light green on the image. 
Lithologies 
Lithological  trends  were  established  wherever  possible.  There  were  sharp  lithological  contacts  on  the 
imagery were no mapping was done (fig.4.6). Near the GGB there was folding in the meta-conglomerate 
observed by Tshibubudze et al., (2009). Most of the eastern part of the image is covered by sand dunes 
and  alluvium  occurs  in  areas  near  the  river  this  is  marked  by  a  light  yellowish  colour  on  the  imagery. 
Other lithologies observed include volcanic intrusions e.g. TTG, granite which have a pink colour on the 
imagery. 
37

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 4.6: Sharp lithological contacts (orange) 
4.2  Extraction  of  geographic/  physical  features  using  LANDSAT  7  (RGB)  432  false  colour 
composite. 
RGB 432 colour composite was used to delineate the human geography these includes roads, cities and 
villages and drainage systems (fig. 4.7).  This was done on a large scale. This RGB 432 band combination 
highlights the following: 
Vegetation has shades of red, deep red shows healthy vegetation while light red shows grasslands and/or 
sparsely  vegetated  areas.  Urban  areas  have  a  cyan  blue.  Soils  have  light  to  dark  brown  colours. 
Coniferous trees are darker red than hardwoods. 
38

--- Page 39 ---
A 
B 
Figure 4.7: A-RGB 432 false colour composite with areas of healthy and dense vegetation shown in red 
and  areas  of  less  vegetation  shown  in  light  red.  Rivers  are  marked  in  blue  and  cities  (City  of 
Ouagadougou) in cyan blue (B) and drainage systems are shown in red indicating that there is vegetation 
along the river (B). 
Using the image above, a map showing locations of roads and cities as well as small villages was made 
using CorelDraw X3 ® Software (Fig. 4.8).  
39

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 4.8: Locality map of Burkina Faso showing cities (dark blue), towns and villages (pink) and roads 
(brown) 
40

--- Page 41 ---
4.3 Extraction of geological features using Magnetic data 
The interpretation of magnetic data was done using figure 3:D which was the combination of A, B and C. 
from the data there were dominant NW trending lineaments (green)  and areas of shear (black) were NE 
trending (Fig. 4.9). 
Figure 4.9: interpretation of magnetic data. Green- Lineaments and black-areas of shear. 
4.4 Extraction of geological features using radiometric data 
The normal (A) and inverted (B) radiometric data were used for the extraction. Since parts of the study 
area is cut off, only limited extraction was done. A few lineaments and areas of shear were extracted. The 
lineaments are NE-NW trending and the shears are NE trending (fig. 4.10). 
41

--- Page 42 ---
A 
B 
Figure 4.10: A- normal radiometric data and B- inverted radiometric data. Black- Lineaments, Red- areas 
of shear. 
42

--- Page 43 ---
CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION 
5.1 Observations 
From the Landsat 7 imagery, Magnetic and radiometric data a number of features  were extracted 
including lineaments, Greenstone Belts, laterite, dykes, joints sets, shear zones. Lineaments in all the data 
sets had east to ENE, north to NNW and NEasterly trends. Most of the major lineaments as seen on the 
data  sets  had  NW-NE  trends.  The  areas  of  shear  investigated  in  all  data  set  were  dominantly  NNE 
trending with a few trending NW. The four greenstone belts studied in literature could only be extracted 
clearly from the Landsat 7 imagery. The greenstone belts were covered by laterite caps which followed 
the orientation of the greenstone belts throughout the images. Areas of greenstone belt occurrences were 
easily 
identified  by 
looking  at  occurrences  of 
the 
laterite  caps.  The  Landsat  with  (RGB 
) 731 FCC used for extraction of geological features was very helpful because the band combination has 
an advantage of distinguishing different rock types. The greenstone belts had a brownish to orange colour; 
volcanic had a grey colour, granodiorites had a pinkish colour and sand dunes had a yellowish colour. The 
laterites have a dark brown to purple colour and were easy to distinguish from the imagery. The drainage 
systems  on  the  imagery  were  used  for  lineament  identification  and  major  drainages  were  classified  as 
major joints because they show area of weakness which the river penetrated and could flow through. The 
major joint sets had the same orientation as the lineaments. The extraction of human geography was done 
using  432  FCC  because  of  the  advantages  that  this  band  combination  has  as  documented  in  the 
methodology. Roads, rivers, vegetation, drainage systems, towns, cities and villages were easy to identify 
and these was more useful for creating a locality map and thus for land use and land cover classification. 
From  the  magnetic  and  radiometric  data  lineaments  with  same  orientation  found  in  both  Landsat  and 
Aster imagery were also found, as well as areas of shear. Since the Radiometric data was cut off limited 
extraction was done on the data. 
5.2 Geological mapping 
Shear zone and dyke 
From the extraction done previously the interpretation of the shear zones and NW trending dolerite 
dykes found are in accordance with observations made by Tshibubudze et al 2009 for the NNE trending 
Markoye  and  Takabangou  shear  zones(  fig.5.1)  which  were  also  extracted  using  Landsat  imagery 
followed  by  field  mapping  to  ground  truth  the  shear  zones  and  the  dykes.  SSZ  which  is  a  major  shear 
43

--- Page 44 ---
zone cuts the Goren greenstone belt and the BSZ cuts the OGGB and this is in accordance with what has 
been documented in literature. 
Greenstone belts and laterite profiles 
Since no GIS work has been done on the greenstone belts, there is no confirmation of association of 
greenstone  belts  with  laterite  profiles  found  throughout  the  study  area.  From  the  interpretation  it  was 
found  that  the  laterite  profiles  have  the  same  orientation  as  the  greenstone  belts  and  cover  most  of  the 
study  area  where  greenstone  belts  are  located.  Studies  by  Hein,  (2008)  show  that  dykes  in  northern 
Burkina Faso have laterite skirts and from the interpretation done in this study most of the dolerite dykes 
interpreted  had  the  laterite  skirts.  The  four  greenstone  belts  Goren,  Bouroum,  Oudalan-Gorouol,  and 
Yalogo  greenstone  belts  locations  were  defined.  A  Goren  Greenstone  Belt  is  cut  by  a  series  of  NE 
trending joint sets and the SSZ.  
Figure 5.1:  Interpretative geology map of the Markoye Shear Zone based on combined regional magnetic 
data  (RTP  and  RTP  1st  vertical  derivative),  Landsat  imagery,  with  Landsat  image  p194r050_741  as 
underlay (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). 
44

--- Page 45 ---
5.3. Is GIS and/or Remote sensing good for geological mapping and is it effective? 
The results  obtained  from  the  study  show  that  GIS  is  a  very  useful  tool  for  geological  mapping. 
GIS interpretation can be done before going to the field for ground truth. This use of GIS can decrease the 
cost of mapping. From the study it is evident that Landsat 7 band 7 is very useful for geological studies 
since it helps in distinguishing different rock types. The different band combinations generated in remote 
sensing  using  different bands  is  very  helpful  in  differentiating  features  depending  on  the  area  of  study. 
RGB  321  which  is  a  true  colour  composite  can  be  generated  and  since  it’s  a  representation  of  what  in 
reality (ground) it can also be used for ground truth. From this study 731 and 742 FCC band combinations 
were very helpful for geological mapping and extraction of features; both bands have different advantages 
in highlighting different features. For land use and land cover analysis RGB 432 colour composite was 
used. Image classification which involves two classification systems (supervised and unsupervised) can 
be done for land use studies. 
The use of GIS and remote sensing is very effective for geological studies. Different case studies 
that went this route were successful and this is a new effective tool that is been used and will continue to 
be used for mapping and for geographic studies. The results obtained using GIS are similar to what has 
been done previously (previous maps) and highlight other featured that are not documented on previous 
maps these was evident from this study. 
Recommendations 
From the study it is evident that the use of GIS is effective in that it agrees with what has been done 
before in previous studies and can also help in discovering things that might be missed on the field. This 
method of mapping though it is time consuming it reduces cost of mapping and buying aerial photographs 
which have become costly over the years. Using GIS and remote sensing improves mapping techniques. 
5.4 Comparison 
The  map  done  by  Hottin &  Ouedraogo (1992)  is  missing  a  lot  of  structures  such  as  lineaments,  dykes, 
shear  zones  compared  to the  map  created. The  map  by  Hottin  &  Ouedraogo  (1992)  doesn’t show  sand 
dunes that cover most of the NE Burkina Faso. The new map (Fig. 5.2) has more details but more ground 
truth  in the form  of  mapping  needs  to  be  done to  confirm  some  of  the  features  that are  not  covered  in 
literature or haven’t been mapped. 
45

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 1.2: Geological map of Burkina Faso showing study area (Hottin & Ouedraogo, 1992) 
Figure 5.2: Strato-tectonic-magmatic map of Burkina Faso with distribution of structures and lithology. 
46

--- Page 47 ---
47

--- Page 48 ---
CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSION 
This  research  is  the  first  attempt  that  has  utilized  LANDSAT  data,  magnetic  and  radiometric  data  for 
geological  mapping  and  production  of  a  1:100  000  geological  map  for  the  study  area.  Advantages  of 
LANDSAT images for geological  mapping lie in their high spectral band characteristics. Four different 
false colour composite images were generated and evaluated for extraction purposes. The first FCC 731 in 
RGB image was generated and evaluated for extraction of geological features.  The second FCC 432 in 
RGB image was generated for human geography. The third FCC 742  in RGB image  was also used for 
extraction of geological features, since the FCC 742 imagery has the same advantage as 731 FCC it was 
used to extract features that were not easy to extract like sand dunes on the 731 FCC image. The last FCC 
image was used for the location of outcrops. The prepared 731 FCC imagery (Fig. 3.1) obtained from the 
Landsat 7 data, was used in constructing the detailed strato-tectonic-magmatic map of NE Burkina Faso 
(Fig. 5.2) which illustrates the following:  
1-  The greenstone belts with a brownish to orange colour covered by purple laterite caps, plutonic 
rocks  which  had  a  pinkish  colour  surrounding  the  greenstone  belts  which  were  clearly 
discriminated. 
2-  The shear zones which had NNE- NW trends and dykes with laterite skirts trending NW. 
3-  The lineaments with East to ENE), North to NNW and NEasterly trends and major joints created 
by the drainage system in the area. 
The prepared 432 FCC was helpful in extraction of human  geography and a locality  map for the study 
area was created (Fig. 4.8). The 742 FCC was used for extraction of sand dunes and 753 FCC was used 
for  locating  outcrops.  The  map  created  shows  the  validity  and  usefulness  of  applying  GIS  and  remote 
sensing techniques for geological mapping. Comparing the constructed strato-tectonic-magmatic map of 
NE Burkina Faso (Fig. 5.2) with the previously published maps (Fig 1.2), the study shows the following:  
1-  The  strato-tectonic-magmatic  map  in  the  present  work  shows  more  detailed  information  about 
structural features and lithologies than the previous mapping.  
2-  The FCC images gave additional information helping in improving the previous geological maps 
of the study area.  
3- This new strato-tectonic-magmatic map in this study (Fig. 5.2) needs more field investigations and 
verifications  to  construct  the  detailed  geological  map  of  NE  Burkina  Faso.  This  study  showed  the 
important use of colour composite images constructed from the LANDSAT 7 bands combined with 
the magnetic and radiometric data and for geological mapping improves mapping.  
48
