
--- Page 2 ---
Abstract 
The  Kel  Enguef  metamorphic  belt  is  host  to  metamorphosed  clastic  and  chemical 
sedimentary  rocks  that  are  intruded  by  gabbro  dykes  and  a  diorite  pluton.  The 
metamorphosed  clastic  and  sedimentary  rocks  were  deposited  in  a  deltaic  setting  into  a 
shallow  marine  environment.  The  sequences  comprise  fine-  to  coarse-grained  sedimentary 
rocks  that  exhibit  an  overall  upward  coarsening  stratigraphy.  The  metamorphism  and 
deformation of the sequences is interpreted to have occurred mainly as a result of burial. Both 
greenschist and amphibolite grade metamorphism have been recognised. Gradation between 
these two facies is not observed.  An anomalous occurrence of localised migmatite, which has 
attained granulite facies, lies between the greenschist and amphibolite and adds complexity to 
the  metamorphic  belt.  The  tectonic  history  of  the  region  leads  to  further  complexity  of  the 
KEMB. Folding and tectonic uplift are linked to regional deformation and the emplacement 
of local plutons. Indications of mineralisation occur in the form of an iron stone, ferruginous 
quartzite and a quartz-tourmaline vein. These raise interest for further research into possible 
large deposits of such kinds. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
1.  Introduction 
1.1 Preamble 
The  Kel  Enguef  metamorphic  belt  (KEMB)  is  located  in  the  low  hills  southeast  of  Gorom 
Gorom, in the northeast of Burkina Faso. It is named after the village of Kel Enguef which is 
situated  in  the  east  of  the  field  area.  During  field  reconnaissance  in  2010,  the  KEMB  was 
found by the Wits research team where it presented an anomaly on the regional topographical 
and geological maps. The KEMB has not been researched in detail, thus how it fits in with 
the  surrounding  area  is  unknown.  The  general  region  of  the  KEMB  has  been  mapped  by 
Castaing et al. (2003) and the area has been shown to comprise basalt, rhyolite and tuffaceous 
material  with  evidence  of  possible  gold  mineralisation.  Apart  from  Castaing  et  al.  (2003) 
nothing  further  has  been  described  for  the  area  indicating  the  importance  of  this  study. 
Studies  in  the  surrounding  area  of  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  Greenstone  Belt  (just  east  of  the 
KEMB) by Nikiema et al. (1993), Pons et al. (1995), Debat et al. (2003), Tshibubudze et al. 
(2009)  and  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (submitted)  give  an  understanding  of  the  stratigraphic 
sequences and metamorphism in the area. This has given some indication of what might be 
present in the Kel Enguef metamorphic belt. 
The project has involved the geological mapping of the field area with follow up petrographic 
and mineralogical work to elucidate the stratigraphy and metamorphic facies of the  KEMB. 
An  attempt  has  been  made  to  reconstruct  the  environment  of  deposition  and  the  tectonic 
setting. The study will also investigate if there is any economic mineralization and if so what 
type.  The  Essakane  gold  mine  and  Tambão  manganese  deposit  are  situated  approximately 
20km ESE and 40km NNE of the field area, respectively, and similar styles of mineralisation 
may occur in the field area. 
1.2 Location and physiography 
The KEMB is located in the northeast of Burkina Faso, approximately 275km to the northeast 
of Ouagadougou and east of the town of Gorom Gorom (Fig. 1.1a & 1.1b).  
3

--- Page 5 ---
STUDY AREA 
a. 
Road to Markoye 
N 
Kel Enguef 
Kel Enguef metamorphic belt 
1 km 
b. 
Road to Dori 
Figure 1.1: a) Location of field area within Burkina Faso with surrounding greenstone belts and major shears 
indicated (after Tshibubudze et al., 2009). b) Satellite image of the field area in relation to Gorom Gorom. Indicated 
on the image is the location of Kel Enguef and the main roads in the area. (Google Earth) 
4

--- Page 6 ---
The  field  area,  which  is  approximately  30km2,  hosts  two  east-west  trending  ridges  that 
expose a portion of the KEMB  (Fig. 1.1b). The  UTM coordinates of the extent of the field 
area  are:    30  P  (Northern  Hemisphere)  0805000  E,  1600000  N;  0805000  E,  1594000  N; 
0810000 E, 1594000 N; 0810000 E, 1600000 N. This region of Burkina Faso is situated in 
the Sahel, just south of the Sahara Desert.  Climatic conditions are arid, that is very hot and 
dry.  Field  work  was  carried  out  in  January  which  is  the  coolest  time  of  the  year  although 
daily  temperatures  exceeded  30  ⁰C.  Wind  speeds  are  typically  high  which  provided  some 
relief from the heat. These winds, however, can cause a lot of dust to rise. At this time of the 
year, the dust forms what is called the pre-Harmattan. 
The land between the ridges  and on  either side  is  relatively flat  with river channels  cutting 
into  the  land.  The  river  channels  are  narrow  and  dissect  the  land  surface  to  a  metre  depth 
making traveling by vehicle difficult. At this time of the year water is becoming increasingly 
scarce  and  all  rivers  in  the  region  are  now  dry.  River  channels  trend  east  towards  a  major 
river that is located on the eastern limits of the field area. The majority of the land between 
the ridges is covered by millet fields where the underlying rock is covered by a layer of sand. 
Huts  are  scatted  across  the  farm  land  with  the  village  of  Kel  Enguef  situated  to  the  east 
between  the  two  ridges  of  the  field  area  (Fig.  1.1b).  Dirt  roads  are  present  connecting  the 
village of Kel Enguef to the main road off to the west of the field area. Access into the field 
was either from this main road or from the north off a main road that connects Gorom Gorom 
to the village of Markoye (Fig. 1.1b). 
1.3 Aims 
The KEMB had not previously been mapped in detail and no previous research has been done 
on the area. This project attempted to gain a better understanding of the geology of the area 
with  a  focus  on  the  stratigraphy  and  metamorphism.  The  environment  of  deposition  of  the 
rocks  was  determined.  The  pressure  and  temperature  conditions  were  established  to 
determine  the  metamorphic  grade  and  the  overall  metamorphic  history  of  the  KEMB.  An 
economic aspect in this project was to study mineralisation present in the KEMB if any.  
5

--- Page 7 ---
1.4 Acronyms 
KEMB- 
Kel Enguef metamorphic belt 
UTM-   
Universal Transverse Mercator 
TTG-   
Tonalite-trondjhemite-granodiorite 
6

--- Page 8 ---
2.  Geology setting 
2.1 Regional geology and tectonics 
The West African Craton is composed of Palaeoproterozoic rocks of the Birimian Supergroup 
(Feybesse et  al.,  2006; Hein,  2010) and Tarkwa Group (Davis  et  al.,  1994)  as  well as  calc-
alkaline plutons which include tonalite-trondjhemite-granodiorite and diorite intrusions which 
intrude the Palaeoproterozoic stratigraphy (Pons et al., 1995; Naba et al., 2004 Hein, 2010). 
The Birimian Supergroup is dominated by metamorphosed sedimentary, volcano-sedimentary 
and  volcanic  sequences.  The  meta-volcanic  sequences  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt  and 
Boromo greenstone belt are at dated at 2238 ± 5 Ma and 2171 ± 7 Ma respectively (Castaing 
et  al.,  2003)  based  on  Pb-Pb  zircon  dating  from  rhyolites  within  the  belts.  The 
metasedimentary  rocks  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  comprise  mainly  metamorphosed 
volcaniclastics,  greywacke,  siltstone,  shale,  chemical  sediments  and  chert.  The  younger 
Tarkwa  Group,  dated  at  2194–2132  Ma  from  U-Pb  detrital  zircons  (Davis  et  al.,  1994), 
comprises  clastic  sedimentary  rocks  derived  from  erosion  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  of 
which it overlies unconformably (Hirdes et al., 1992 and Davis et al., 1994). 
The craton has been subjected to several tectonic events corresponding to the deformation of 
Birimian  Supergroup.  This  includes  the  SW  directed  shortening  of  the  Tangaean  Event 
(2170-2130  Ma),  SE-NW  shortening  of  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (2130-1980  Ma)  and  the 
young Wabo-Tampelse Event. The Tangaean Event and Eburnean Orogeny were associated 
with emplacement of TTG-suite plutons and dykes (Feybesse et al., 2006; Tshibubudze et al., 
2009; Hein 2010). The tectonic events resulted in the formation of greenstone belts separated 
by  the  granitoids  (Hirdes  and  Davis,  2002).  The  Eburnean  Orogeny  resulted  in  regional 
metamorphism of the Birimian Supergroup to greenschist facies and contact metamorphism 
from pluton emplacement to low - medium amphibolite facies (Pons et al., 1995; Debat et al., 
2003).  
2.2 Local geology 
The  Markoye  Shear  Zone  lies  to  the  east  of  the  KEMB.  The  Oudalan-Gorouol  Greenstone 
Belt  is  situated  just  east  of  the  shear  zone  (Pons  et  al.,  1995;  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009; 
Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  submitted).  This  comprises  metamorphosed  and  deformed 
7

--- Page 9 ---
volcaniclastic,  volcanics  and  sedimentary  rocks.  The  sedimentary  units  are  composed  of 
metamorphosed  conglomerate,  quartzite,  greywacke,  siltstone,  shale  and  chemical 
sedimentary rocks (Nikiéma, 1992; Pons et al., 1995; Tshibubudze et al., 2009; Tshibubudze 
and Hein, submitted).  Volcaniclastic sequences comprise greywacke composed of medium-
grained quarts and feldspar-rich sand. Intercalated with greywacke units are  fuchsite layers, 
thin chert beds,  shale, siltstone and rare pebble beds (Pons  et  al., 1995;  Tshibubudze et  al., 
2009).  A  calk-alkaline  series  comprising  ultramafics,  gabbro,  basalt,  andesite  and  rhyolite 
associated with the volcaniclastic and sedimentary rocks are present (Pons et al., 1995) 
Two  phases  of  regional  metamorphism  are  present  in  these  rocks  and  characterised  by  two 
mineral  assemblages  (Pons  et  al.,  1995).  These  are  low-grade  assemblages  of  prehinite, 
chlorite,  actinolite  and  quartz  as  well  as  low-grade  assemblages  associated  with  regional 
schistosity.  Specifically  the  Oudalan-Gorouol  Greenstone  Belt  has  undergone  greenschist-
facies  metamorphism  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  Regional  metamorphism  to  greenschist 
facies is associated to north-south crustal shortening during the Eburnean Orogeny (Vidal et 
al., 1996, Beziat et al., 2000, Hein et al., 2004 and Naba et al., 2004). Contact metamorphism 
of  these  rocks  occurred  due  to  the  emplacement  of  granitoids  which  include  granite-
adamellite,  granite  and  granodiorite  compositions  (Pons  et  al.,  1995;  Debat  et  al.,  2003; 
Tshibubudze et al., 2009). Metamorphism of the surrounding units to the granitoids occurred 
to  amphibolite-facies  (Pons  et  al.,  1995;  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009;  Tshibubudze  and  Hein, 
submitted)  and  granulite  facies  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  submitted)..  Through  hornblende 
barometric estimates, shallow crust (3-4 kbar) emplacement of plutons has been established 
(Pons et al., 1992). 
Gold and manganese mineralisation as well as pegamatite veins are present in the Oudalan-
Gorouol  greenstone  belt  (Milési  et  al.,  1992;  Nikiéma,  1992;  Beauvais  et  al.,  2008 
Tshibubudze, et al., 2009; Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted). Gold mineralisation, found at 
many locations, is hosted in shear zones as structural hosted lode-gold associated with NW-
SE structures (Nikiéma, 1992; Tshibubudze et al., 2009; Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted). 
Manganese  mineralisation  is  situated  NE  and  SW  of  the  KEMB  at  Tambăo  and  Billiata 
(Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted) and pegamatite veins are situated NE at Tambăo. 
8

--- Page 10 ---
3.   Methodology 
In order to  gain  an understanding of the field  area, a mosaic was constructed using Google 
Earth® images of the Kel Enguef metamorphic belt before entering the field. This was used 
to  locate  the  field  area  with  respect  to  the  surrounding  topography  which  included  the 
location and orientation of rivers and ridges, as well as roads and villages. These were used 
for orientation in the field.  
Reconnaissance of the terrain and geology was carried out  in the field area before mapping 
commenced. This assisted in planning field mapping and the location of suitable drop-off and 
pick-up points and access within the field area. Mapping was carried out over a period of 13 
field  days  during  January  2011.  Field  mapping  was  undertaken  by  3  relatively  straight 
northwest-southeast traverses directly across the field area, one on either side of the field area 
and one through the middle (Fig. 3.1). Multiple short traverses were carried out across each 
ridge running perpendicular to strike. Furthermore, loosely defined traverses were carried out 
in the central region and south of the southern ridge to locate outcrop which was scarce. Data 
was  recorded  in  field  books  and  notes  were  supported  by  photographs  of  selected  outcrops 
along  traverse  lines.  The  location,  rock  type,  attitude,  mineralogy,  structural  data  and 
metamorphism  were  recorded.  Rock  samples  were  taken  at  particular  station  points  during 
mapping. Logging and back up of all data was done after each day in the field.  
The  Google  Earth  mosaic  was  geo-referenced  using  MapInfo.  Station  points  that  were 
situated at positions easily identified on the image were used as reference points in the geo-
referencing  process.  Once  the  image  was  referenced  using  five  such  points,  the  remaining 
station  points  were  overlaid  onto  the  image  (Fig.  3.1).  This  created  an  image  overlaid  with 
station  points  corresponding  to  their  actual  position.  By  overlaying  tracing  paper  onto  the 
image,  geographical  and  geological  features  were  recorded  to  produce  a  geographical  and 
surface cover map (Fig. 3.2) as well as a geological map (Fig. 3.3). These traces were then 
digitized using CorelDraw®.  
Samples  were  strategically  selected  for  thin  sections  and  polished  ore  blocks.  An  initial  15 
samples were submitted to the Wits Geosciences Laboratory to be processed (14 thin sections 
and 1 polished ore block) in early March 2011. A further 25 samples were submitted to SGS 
for  thin  sections  and  XRD  (samples  with  economic  interest).  Another  3  samples  were 
9

--- Page 11 ---
submitted  to  Wits  Geosciences  Laboratory  for  ore  blocks  in  June  2011.  Thin  sections 
petrography analysed for mineral assemblages, grain size and textural features. Minerals were 
identified using their optical properties with the assistance of mineral identification books and 
knowledgeable  staff  members.  Associations  between  minerals  were  also  a  focus.  The 
petrographic  data  combined  with  field  data  was  used  to  determine  protoliths  and 
metamorphic  facies.  Ore  blocks  were  analysed  for  minerals  present  with  the  help  of  XRD 
data. Mineral associations were a focus in determining petrogenesis. Pictures were taken of 
the thin sections and ore blocks to indicate mineral assemblages and textural features present 
in the samples. 
10

--- Page 12 ---
N 
1 km 
Figure 3.1: Google Earth mosaic of the KEMB with station point distribution and NW-SE traverses (blue lines) 
indicated over the field area. The ridges, central and southern region were mapped by loosely defined 
traverses. 
11

--- Page 13 ---
Kel Enguef 
Figure 2.2: Geography and surface cover map of the KEMB. 
12

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 3.3: Geological interpretation map of the KEMB 
13

--- Page 15 ---
4.  Field description 
The  field  area  is  a  metamorphic  terrane  that  ranges  from  greenschist  facies  to  amphibolite 
facies,  with  metamorphic  grade  increasing  from  the  north  to  the  south.  The  two  east-west 
trending ridges are host to greenschist facies rocks which are separated by relatively flat open 
millet fields with limited outcrop. The outcrop in this region indicates the presence of cross-
cutting  gabbro  dykes,  a  dioritic  pluton  and  possibly  underlying  greenschist  facies, 
metamorphosed  sedimentary  rocks.  Rocks  of  amphibolite  facies  are  situated  along  the 
southern  margin  of  the  field  area  where  the  outcrop  trends  east  west.  Between  the 
amphibolite  zone  and  the  southern  ridge,  outcrop  is  scarce  however  a  localised  pod  of 
migmatite-gneiss occurs herein.  
Mapping in the  central  and southern  region  was  limited by the lack of outcrop. The region 
between the two ridges is approximately 3 km wide and comprises sandy farming land in the 
centre, as well as river beds which drain towards the east. Rock is present as sparse float. The 
regions between the farm land and ridges are covered by loose sand and float. Float is derived 
from the ridges. Buck quartz veins crop out near the margin of the two ridges; the veins are 
dark grey in colour. They have a lateral extent in an east-west direction. A characteristic of 
the veins is a dense network of fractures marked by black glass.  
The northern part of the field area is host to an extensive fluvial system which was dry at the 
time  of  field  work.  The  associated  alluvial  sediment  covers  the  underlying  rock  apart  from 
the western edge of the field area where small, low lying outcrops are visible. A large buck 
quartz vein is located 100 m north of the northern ridge.  
4.1 Metamorphic stratigraphy 
The southernmost region of the field area comprises amphibolite which crops out poorly. The 
amphibolite is dark green in colour and hosts a strong fabric that is pervasive. The sequence 
is  medium-  to  fine-grained  and  dominated  by  hornblende  and  quartz.  Course-grained 
hornblende-bearing quartzite occurs within the amphibolite (Fig. 4.1d), especially to the east 
of the sequence. The fabric is derived from compositional layering (Fig. 4.1a). Quartz layers 
are dominated by quartz with small amounts of hornblende, and plagioclase is absent. These 
layers are generally thinner than the hornblende layers. Hornblende layers are dominated by 
fine-grained  hornblende  and  quartz  with  minor  plagioclase.  Fine  compositional  layering  is 
found in the east where the unit is folded and contains small-scale shears (Fig. 4.1b & 4.1c). 
14

--- Page 16 ---
Coarse-grained quartz-plagioclase veins cut the amphibolite and are also present along some 
shear zones.  These veins are only seen in  this part of the unit and  are a few millimetres in 
width. Deformation is variable throughout the unit. Isoclinal folding (Fig. 4.1e), shearing and 
augen gneiss is common in the eastern part of the unit. Small scale isoclinal folds are present 
where  limbs  of  the  folds  are  close  and  within  a  fold  width  of  10  to  20  cm.  Some  isoclinal 
folds are truncated by small-scale planar shears. Slip was determined to be sinistral reverse. 
Augen  gneiss  are  present  with  augen  tails  extend  many  centimetres  away  from  each  augen 
parallel to compositional banding (Fig. 4.1d). The augen are up to 2 cm thick and 5 cm long. 
Some augen exhibit a weak anticlockwise rotation.  
These deformation features are confined to the east of the sequence where a large scale fold is 
located.  Although  the  sequence  cannot  we  traced  continuously,  the  variable  strike  would 
suggest a large fold. Tracing the amphibolite outcrop from east to west, the fabric orientation 
is  as  follows:  019⁰/70⁰W,  052⁰/64⁰E,  051⁰/78⁰W,  178⁰/63⁰E,  008⁰/75⁰E  which  sharply 
changes to 066⁰/79⁰S.  
To the west, the amphibolite has a relatively constant trend of about 075⁰ dipping to the north 
at  approximately  72⁰.  Deformation  of  the  unit  is  less  evident  in  the  west.  Here  spotted 
amphibolite  is  present  (Fig.  4.1f).  Coarse-grained  plagioclase  crystals  form  positive 
weathering features that stand proud of the rock. The plagioclase crystals are about 4 mm in 
diameter  and  stand  out  approximately  2  mm  from  the  surface.  These  give  the  spotted 
amphibolite its appearance. 
15

--- Page 17 ---
a. 
b. 
c. 
N 
e. 
d. 
f. 
Figure 4.1: Amphibolite outcrop. a) fine composition-banding located in the eastern part of the units. b & 
c) small scale shear truncating isoclinal fold. d) small scale isoclinal fold in hornblende-baring quartzite. e) 
quartz augen with sinistral rotation. f) spotted amphibolite with compositional-banding.   
16

--- Page 18 ---
a. 
Two layers of metamorphosed banded iron formation crop out on the eastern side of the field 
area just north of the amphibolite. The contact between the two units is not visible. Outcrop 
to subcrop can be traced for approximately 300 m. The banded iron formation comprises fine 
laminations  (not  more  than  1  cm  thick)  of  light  grey  chert  and  dark  brown,  fine-grained, 
ironstone (Fig. 4.2a). An irregular surface exists between the chert and iron-rich layers. Soft-
sediment  deformation  features  are  evident  by  the  presence  of  isoclinal  slump  folds  (Fig. 
4.2a).  A  common  feature  of  the  banded  ironstone  is  cross-cutting  thin,  siliceous  veins.  The 
combination  of  the  siliceous  layers  and  veins  create  a  cross-hatched  pattern  on  weathering 
surfaces especially where veins are concentrated (Fig. 4.2b). The banded ironstone formation 
is  folded.  It  changes  in  strike  from  066⁰  to  137⁰  and  168⁰  before  abruptly  turning  to  069⁰ 
(Fig. 3.3). The banded ironstone formation dips towards the north between 30 and 45⁰. In the 
west of the region, banded ironstone float was observed over a distance of about 100 m. The 
float  is  scattered  with  no  in-situ  outcrop  visible  thus  questioning  whether  the  formation  is 
present here.  
a. 
b. 
Figure 4.2: Banded ironstone. a) fine laminated banding with soft sediment  slump folding. b) dense 
quartz veins exhibiting a cross-hatch weathering pattern. 
17

--- Page 19 ---
The  southern  ridge  is  approximately  2.5  km  in  length  trending  east-west  (in  the  west)  and 
northeast-southwest (in the east). The eastern limb of the ridge has a mean calculated strike 
and  dip  of  066⁰/37⁰N  (Fig.  4.3a).  The  western  limb  has  mean  calculated  strike  and  dip  of 
270⁰/42⁰N  (Fig.  4.3b)  with  orientation  data  fitting  tightly  together.  The  southern  ridge 
comprises  four  quartz-rich  units  (Units  A  –  D)  of  similar  mineralogy  that  can  be 
distinguished by varying grain  size (and slight compositional variation). The  southern units 
comprise isoclinal folds with hinges parallel to the bedding plane.  
Unit A is a medium-grained quartzite that hosts fine-grained muscovite and iron oxides. Iron 
rich zones are not constrained to single beds. Hornblende occurs in lesser amounts in this unit 
and is seen as black specks in the rock. Unit A is discontinuous along the southern margin of 
the southern ridge. A small ridge that is located just south of the main ridge exposes the best 
outcrop  of  this  unit.  The  unit  is  absent  to  the  west  of  this  ridge  whereas  to  the  east  it  is 
discontinuous.  The  quartzite  strikes  approximately  080⁰  and  dip  towards  the  north  at  about 
45⁰. The grain size decreases northward towards Unit B.  
Unit B consists of interbedded fine- and medium- grained, iron-rich quartzite that is dark red-
brown  in  colour.  The  unit  is  approximately  10  m  thick.  Bedding  features  are  not  visible 
within the unit and compositional layering is not well presented.  
Unit C is situated along the southern slope of the southern ridge and comprises a medium- to 
coarse-grained quartzite with muscovite, iron oxides and epidote. Unit C is gradational with 
Unit  B  and  D.  Within  Unit  C,  there  are  zones  with  varying  iron  content.  Compositional 
layering  is  prominent  in  this  unit.  Quartz  grains  are  strained  and  elongated  parallel  to  the 
direction  of  compositional  layers.  A  fabric,  parallel  to  compositional  layers  is  pervasive 
throughout the unit (Fig. 4.5a & 4.5b). This unit it continuous along the southern slope of the 
ridge and coarsens towards the top of the ridge and Unit D.  
The top of the ridge and the northern slope consist of coarse-grained quartzite with medium- 
to fine-grained muscovite, epidote, quartz and interstitial iron oxide (Unit D). Quartz grains 
are angular and elongated parallel to strike of compositional layers which are well defined in 
Unit  D.  Layers  range  from  a  few  centimetres  up  to  tens  of  centimetres.  Quartz  grains  are 
course  from  5 to  10 mm.  Iron content  varies throughout  the unit. Some  layers exhibit  tight 
folds and undulations. This unit strikes approximately 090⁰ and dips at 40⁰ northward on the 
18

--- Page 20 ---
western limb of the ridge. On the eastern limb of the ridge, the unit strikes at approximately 
065⁰ and dips 35⁰ northward. The eastern limb is disjointed   
A fine-grained, ferruginous-quartzite is located approximately 100 m away from the eastern 
end of the southern ridge. Outcrop is confined to a 20 m stretch with a width of 3 m. The unit 
is highly magnetic, massive and coarse-grained with dark red quartz veins crosscut the unit.  
19

--- Page 21 ---
066⁰ 
090⁰ 
a. 
b. 
Figure 4.3: Equal area stereographic projection of poles to (a) the eastern limb of the 
southern ridge with a mean calculated strike and dip of 066⁰/37⁰N and (b) the western 
limb of the southern ridge with a mean calculated strike and dip of 090⁰/42⁰N. 
20

--- Page 22 ---
084⁰ 
068⁰ 
a. 
b. 
Figure 4.4: Equal area stereographic projection of (a) poles to the northern ridge with a 
mean calculated strike and dip of 084⁰/58⁰N and (b) the orientations of dominant 
lineations in the northern ridge with a mean calculated principle direction of 068⁰/26⁰. 
21

--- Page 23 ---
The  northern  ridge  consists  of  three  meta-sedimentary  units  that  are  metamorphosed  to 
greenschist facies. As with  the southern ridge, the rocks here are dominated by  quartz with 
muscovite, epidote and iron oxides. The central and western region of the northern ridge host 
three  well  defined  units  which  form  ridges  separated  by  valleys.  Here  the  units  trends 
approximately  east-west and dip at 58⁰N (Fig. 4.4a; 4.5f & 4.5g). In the eastern region, the 
units  are  poorly  defined  and  the  ridges  are  broken  up  to  form  low  hillocks  where  the  units 
trend 085⁰ and dip 60⁰ N. A dominant lineation is common in the outcrop with a dip and dip 
direction of 26⁰ towards 068⁰ (Fig. 4.4b). 
Unit  X  (southern  side  of  the  northern  ridge),  comprises  a  medium-  to  coarse-grained 
quartzite.  Unit  X  is  approximately  50  to  100  m  thick.  Compositional  variations  are  evident 
throughout.  It  is  common to  have iron rich horizons, which are a dark red brown in colour 
and  vary  in  thickness  from  10  to  20  cm  up  to  a  few  metres.  Compositional  layering  is 
typically planar to undulate with a pervasive fabric parallel to layering (Fig. 4.5e). This unit is 
continuous in the central and western regions of the main ridge, but is crosscut by a series of 
north-westerly trending faults. Towards the eastern end of the ridge the faults off-set Unit W 
up to 40 m.  
Unit  Y  (centre  of  the  northern  ridge)  is  dominated  by  course-grained  quartzite  with  rare 
muscovite and iron oxides. Quartz pebbles range up to a few centimetres in size. The quartz 
grains are elongated and form a strong fabric in the unit. Quartz veins are present which are 
parallel to the fabric. These can range in size from a few centimetres in width and length up 
to several metres, showing little to no foliation through them.  
Unit  Z,  located  on  the  northern  side  of  the  northern  ridge,  comprised  interbedded  fine-  to 
coarse-grained metapelite to quartzite. Where grain size is coarse, compositional layering is 
thick (up to 40 cm) with quartz pebbles up to 2 cm in size with varying amounts of muscovite 
and epidote.  The iron content varies throughout the unit (Fig. 4.5c). Metaclastics exhibit thin 
bedding  (on  a  centimetre  scale)  with  quartz  grains  up  to  2  mm  in  size  and  accessory 
muscovite and epidote. A high concentration of iron oxide is present in layers. Quartzite beds 
are typically thicker with pebbles up to 10 mm in size. Muscovite is more abundant in these 
beds. The unit exhibits strained grains that are elongated parallel to bedding and gives rise to 
grain  lineation.  Quartz  veins  are  a  common  feature  and  are  occur  parallel  to  bedding  with 
crystal growth perpendicular to bedding.  
22

--- Page 24 ---
a. 
c. 
e. 
f. 
b. 
d.
. 
g. 
Figure 4.5: Greenschist facies rocks. a & b) bedding with subparallel to parallel foliation. c) iron-rich 
(dark) and iron-poor (light) layering in fine-grained metaclastic. d) highly foliated and deformed 
beds of the southern ridge. e) strong foliation in medium-grained beds. f & g)moderately northerly 
dipping beds of the northern ridge. 
23

--- Page 25 ---
a. 
c. 
b. 
d. 
Figure 4.6: Migmatite-gneiss outcrop exhibiting ( a & b) fine compositional bands with flow 
textures, (c) thick compositional bands of leucosomes and melanosomes and (d) regions of 
gneissic textures.  
24

--- Page 26 ---
A zone of migmatite-gneiss crops out in the south of the field area between amphibolite and 
greenschist  facies  rocks.  Outcrop  occurs  as  large  boulders  and  in-situ  blocks  which  are 
scattered  over  an  area  covering  about  600  by  200  m  (Fig.  3.3).  Over  the  full  extent  of  the 
outcrop  there  is  large  variation  between  zones  of  migmatite  and  gneiss.  The  migmatite 
contains  compositional  bands  of  dark  and  light  grey  minerals  that  characterise  partial  melt 
with flow texture. The compositional bands vary from a few millimetres in thickness to many 
centimetres  (Fig.  4.6a  &  4.6b)  and  less  commonly  up  to  approximately  20  cm  thick  (Fig. 
4.6c). The light coloured bands consist of medium- to fine-grained quartz, plagioclase, alkali 
feldspar and accessory muscovite and biotite. Dark grey bands are fine-grained and consist of 
biotite  and  quartz  with  accessory  plagioclase.  The  gneissic  zones  exhibit  partial  zoning  of 
light and dark minerals (Fig. 4.6d). The gneiss consists of medium- to course-grained quartz, 
plagioclase,  alkali  feldspar  and  mica.  Within  in  the  gneiss  there  are  potassium  rich  zones 
which are observed where the outcrop has  a grey-pink  appearance. Veins  of coarse-grained 
quartz and plagioclase cross cut the migmatite and gneiss with some exhibiting off set. The 
veins are orientated north-south. 
4.2 Ferricrete 
The flat lying area is covered by ferricrete which is made up of two horizons (Fig. 4.7). The 
most  prominent  outcrops  occur  around  the  southern  ridge  and  in  the  north  east  of  the  field 
area. The best exposure occurs where rivers have cut into these outcrops. The upper horizon 
is  approximately  1  m  thick  and  the  lower  is  about  20  cm  thick.  The  dark  red  ferricrete 
horizons consist of quartz-iron pisoliths in an iron-cement comprising haematite and goethite. 
Figure 4.7: Ferricrete horizons in river cutting 
25

--- Page 27 ---
4.3 Tertiary sands 
These lie above the ferricrete horizons and sometimes as perched ridges on the sides of the 
main ridges. The sands are currently eroding.  
4.4 Intrusions 
A diorite pluton crops out poorly on the northern side of the southern ridge in  contact with 
greenschist facies meta-sedimentary rocks. The diorite is light grey in colour and consists of, 
quartz, plagioclase and muscovite. The pluton is roughly oval in shape.  
Gabbro dykes are interpreted to crosscut the central region between the northern and southern 
ridges. This is based on a linear array of gabbro in subcrop across the region and coincident 
linear magmatic highs in geophysical maps of the region. Boulders of gabbro are commonly 
located several  metres  to  hundred metres apart from  one another, but  a 6 m  wide northeast 
trending  outcrop  of  gabbro  is  situated  on  the  north-western  side  of  the  southern  ridge. 
Outcrops  of  gabbro  were  observed  near  houses  and  on  tracks.  The  outcrop  consisted  of 
medium-grained  crystals  of  plagioclase  and  pyroxene.  Distribution  of  minerals 
is 
homogeneous.  Quartz veins crosscut the gabbro. Where the quartz veins are thin (between 5 
and 10 mm) the quartz is isotropic and where the veins are thicker (up to 50 mm) large quartz 
crystals are present. The width and lateral extent of the dykes is not well defined due to the 
lack of outcrop. It is determined that at least three dykes cross-cut the central region. 
4.4 Mineralisation indicators 
Iron occurrence 
A  fine-grained,  ferruginous-quartzite  (Fig.  4.8)  is  located  approximately  100  m  away  from 
the eastern end of the southern ridge. Outcrop is confined to a 20 m stretch with a width of 3 
m.  The  unit  is  highly  magnetic,  massive  and  coarse-grained  with  dark  red  quartz  veins 
crosscut the unit.  
26

--- Page 28 ---
An iron stone is hosted in the amphibolite, situated in the southern most region of the field 
area.  It  is  black  in  colour,  extremely  hard  and  strongly  magnetic.  It  is  fine-grained  and 
crosscut  by  10  cm  thick  quartz  veins  (Fig.  4.9b  &  4.9c).  The  outcrop  is  3  m  in  size  (Fig. 
4.9a). Iron-rich ferricrete surrounds the outcrop.  
Quartz-tourmaline vein 
A  massive  quartz  tourmaline  vein  is  situated  approximately  a  kilometre  northeast  of  the 
diorite.  This  vein  is  30  m  long  and  sigmoidal  in  form.  Therein  hosts  an  abundance  of 
tourmaline crystals that are randomly orientated (Fig. 4.10a). The crystals are up to 3 cm in 
length and 3 mm in width. Tourmaline veins (approximately 20 cm) crosscut the quartz vein 
with  tourmaline crystals  extending out  from  veins (Fig. 4.10b). The tourmaline veins  strike 
170⁰ and dip 20⁰ E.  
Figure 4.8: Fine-grained, ferruginous-quartzite cut by quartz vein (left) 
27

--- Page 29 ---
a. 
b. 
c. 
Figure 4.9: (a) Localised iron stone outcrop which (b) comprises dark-red, fine-grained iron-rich minerals (c) 
cross-cut but quartz veins and cataclastic quartz. 
a. 
b. 
Figure 4.10: Quartz-tourmaline vein with (a) randomly orientated coarse tourmaline crystals and 
(b) cross-cut by tourmaline veins with crystals radiating out from veins.  
28

--- Page 30 ---
5.  Petrography 
The petrographic study included 16 thin section samples of the Kel Enguef metamorphic belt. 
These  were  chosen  as  representative  samples  of  the  stratigraphy.  The  focus  of  the 
petrographic study was on the textural features and mineral assemblages in order to establish 
the original rock types and the conditions which lead to metamorphism of the metamorphic 
samples. The study splits the samples into the various facies. Intrusive samples focus on the 
mineralogy. 
5.1 Unit descriptions 
Amphibolite 
Amphibolite  samples  consist  of  fine-grained  and  equigranular  minerals  up  to  0.3  mm  (Fig. 
5.1).  The  amphibolite  is  dominated  by  quartz  and  hornblende,  with  plagioclase  in  low 
concentrations.  Mineral  proportions  of  the  whole  rock  are  approximately  hornblende:  54%; 
quartz: 40% and plagioclase 6%. The amphibolite is host to a compositional banding texture 
which is exhibited by the presence of compositional banding. Banding comprises hornblende- 
and quartz-rich bands. The hornblende rich-bands comprise subhedral crystals of hornblende, 
0.2  mm  in  size  and  randomly  orientated.  Quartz  inclusions  are  common  in  the  hornblende 
crystals.  Quartz  is  typically  coarser  grained,  up  to  0.3  mm,  with  an  irregular  sub-rounded 
shape. Plagioclase occurs as an accessory mineral and is subhedral. Plagioclase crystals have 
fine bladed muscovite inclusions. Quartz compositional bands, up to  1mm  in  thickness,  are 
characterised  by  elongated  quartz  crystals  that  are  orientated  parallel  to  the  bands. 
Hornblende is found in trace amounts and plagioclase is absent. Low strain is exhibited and 
grain boundary migration is relatively low. 
Greenschist 
Greenschist  facies  samples  were  selected  from  each  of  the  greenschist  sequences  from  the 
north  and  south  ridge.  They  are  dominated  by  quartz  crystals  with  varying  amounts  of 
muscovite,  iron  oxide,  epidote  and  chlorite.  The  degree  of  strain  is  high  throughout  the 
sample set.  
Samples  from  the  southern  ridge  exhibit  a  dominant  fabric  which  is  produced  by  the 
elongation of crystals, specifically quartz, and the orientation of microcrystalline zones. Two 
different  zones,  which  are  distinguished  by  grain  sizes,  are  identified  in  the  samples.  One 
29

--- Page 31 ---
zone  consists  of  medium  to  fine-grained  quartz  crystals  with  minor  amounts  muscovite. 
Quartz  crystals  are  irregular  in  shape  and  exhibit  undulose  extinction  (Fig.  5.2).  Quartz 
crystals  also  exhibit  intense  grain  boundary  migration  between  one  another.  Crystals  are 
elongate  parallel  to  the  microcrystalline  zones  (Fig.  5.2).  Fractures,  which  are  occasionally 
filled  with  red  iron  oxide,  crosscut  the  quartz  crystals  (Fig.  5.2).  Rare  muscovite  is  fine-
grained. The second zone is composed of microcrystalline quartz (dominant) and muscovite 
and epidote which vary in size from fine- to medium-grained. The microcrystalline zones are 
preferentially orientated and range in thickness up to 2 mm. Angular quartz crystals (up to 1 
mm in size) occur where these zones are thickest. Where thin, a flow texture is present made 
up  of  very  fine  elongated  crystals  of  quarts  and  minor  muscovite.  Epidote,  an  uncommon 
mineral, is elongate and  up to 1 mm in length. Red opaque iron oxides are common within 
the zones and are either blocky and clustered where zones are thicker or elongated and bladed 
where zones are thin. Another feature of thin microcrystalline zones is crack-seal fill where 
fine elongated quartz crystals as fill are oriented perpendicular to the crack direction. Samples 
from Unit C three contain quartz crystals up to 2 mm in size which are also elongated. Within 
the microcrystalline zones, muscovite occurs as both fine bladed crystals and larger crystals 
up to 2 mm in size. Some of the muscovite crystals are deformed and follow the orientation 
of the microcrystalline zone. Muscovite most commonly has formed parallel to sub parallel 
with the orientation of the microcrystalline zone but does also occur to it. Samples from Unit 
D  have  quartz  crystals  up  to  5mm  in  size  and  are  irregular  in  shape  with  grain  boundary 
migration present.  
The sample set from the northern ridge comprises fine-grained crystals of quartz, muscovite, 
epidote  and  red  iron  oxides  and  has  evidence  of  high  strain.  There  is  a  preferential  fabric 
direction  which  is  exhibited  by  elongated  quartz  crystals  and  microcrystalline  zones  (Fig. 
5.2).  The  quartz  crystals  are  approximately  1  mm  in  size  with  the  presence  of  zones  of 
coarser and finer crystals. Quartz crystals contain fine fractures where some of these fractures 
contain iron oxides in  small  amounts. Grain  boundary migration and undulose extinction is 
common with quartz crystals. Microcrystalline zones are a prominent feature in the samples. 
The  zones  vary  in  size  from  less  than  a  millimetre  up  to  2  mm  and  align  parallel  to  the 
elongation  in  quartz  crystals.  They  comprise  very  fine-grained  quartz,  fine  needles  of 
muscovite  and  epidote.  The  texture  within  the  zones  varies  from  needle  like  to  blocky. 
Epidote occurs in low concentrations with an irregular shape and is fine-grained. The opaque 
30

--- Page 32 ---
mineral is typically euhedral to subhedral and is blocky to elongate. Where it occurs in higher 
concentration it is commonly blocky and forms clumps of rounded minerals. 
Migmatite-gneiss 
Granulite samples consist of medium- to fine-grained crystals which do not exhibit any strain. 
The mineralogy consists of quartz, plagioclase and biotite, which are the dominant minerals, 
and  hornblende,  monazite,  sphene  and  magnetite,  make  up  approximately  5  %  of  the  rock. 
Compositional  bands  are  well  defined  by  the  presence  or  absence  of  biotite  (Fig.  5.3).  The 
biotite-rich  bands  are  fine-grained  and  biotite  is  preferentially  aligned  to  the  banding 
direction.  Quartz  and  plagioclase  are  irregular  with  the  occurrence  of  grain  boundary 
migration.  Quartz-rich  bands  are  medium-grained  with  crystals  up  to  2  mm  in  diameter. 
Interstitial  magnetite,  associated  with  monazite  and  sphene,  is  common  in  these  bands  and 
also occurs as inclusions. Quartz is irregular in shape, fractured, and hosts small plagioclase 
inclusions. Plagioclase is 1 mm or smaller in  size and is  subhedral.  Sericite replacement of 
plagioclase is common with the presence of fine-grained muscovite on grain boundaries and 
as inclusions. Biotite is present as an accessory mineral in these zones. Irregular to subhedral 
grains of monazite and sphene are evenly distributed throughout the rock.  
Gabbro 
Samples  are  made  up  of  medium-  to  fine-grained  crystals  of  plagioclase,  actinolite  with 
accessory  muscovite,  sericite  and  chlorite  in  varying  amounts  depending  on  the  sample.  A 
high degree of alteration is evident due to the textures present. Crystals are undeformed and 
there is no presence of a well-defined fabric. However minerals are aligned in regions of the 
thin section. Samples that contain a relatively even distribution of actinolite and plagioclase 
(Fig. 5.4) consist of actinolite ranging in size from medium- to fine-grained. Medium-grained 
crystals  are elongated and subhedral whereas fine-grained crystals  are irregular. Quartz and 
plagioclase inclusions are typical in actinolite. Plagioclase crystals are irregular in shape and 
range  from  medium-  to  fine-grained.  Levels  of  alteration  vary  throughout  the  sample. 
Relatively unaltered plagioclase crystals are present with minor sericite. Altered plagioclase 
crystals  are  almost  completely  recrystallised  in  the  form  of  sericite,  muscovite  and  fine 
grained  cloudy  minerals.  Remnant  twinning  is  present  in  these  altered  plagioclase  crystals. 
The  abundance  of  actinolite  and  plagioclase  vary  in  samples.  Actinolite  may  also  be 
dominant  (85  %)  with  an  absence  of  plagioclase.  These  samples  comprise  coarse-grained 
31

--- Page 33 ---
actinolite which is aligned in parts of the sample. Chlorite is present (8 %) in this sample with 
accessory muscovite, sericite and quartz.  
200 μm 
200 μm 
Figure 5.1: Amphibolite with randomly orientated, subhedral hornblende and quartz crystals  
Ms 
500 μm 
XPL 
Ms 
500 μm 
Qtz 
Qtz 
500 μm 
XPL  
500 μm 
PPL  
PPL  
Figure 5.2: Greenschist facies rocks with medium-grained, elongated quartz crystals which are 
fractured and microcrystalline zones of quartz (Qtz), epidote and muscovite forming the foliation 
with larger muscovite (Ms) crystals within.  
32

--- Page 34 ---
Melanosome 
Leucosome 
Melanosome 
Leucosome 
Mn 
Mn 
PPL  
500 μm 
XPL 
500 μm 
Figure 5.3: Migmatite with melanosome (biotite-rich) and leucosome (quartz-plagioclase-rich) zones  
and monazite (Mn) crystals 
Ac 
Pg 
Ac 
Pg 
Ac 
200 μm 
XPL  
200 μm 
Ac 
PPL 
Figure 5.4: Metamorphosed gabbro with actinolite (Ac) and altered plagioclase (Pg) 
33

--- Page 35 ---
Diorite 
Diorite  samples  comprise  quartz,  plagioclase  and  minor  biotite  and  muscovite  in  small 
amounts.  Quartz  and  plagioclase  are  equigranular  which  are  undeformed.  There  is  a 
homogenous  distribution of minerals  with  no  fabric or deformation  present.  Quartz crystals 
are irregular with jagged grain crystal boundaries and are 1 to 3 mm in size. Grain boundary 
migration  is  relatively  low.  Quartz  exhibits  undulated  extinction.  Plagioclase  and  small 
bladed  biotite  inclusions  are  present.  Plagioclase  crystals  are  subhedral  and  up  to  1  mm  in 
size. There is replacement of plagioclase by muscovite on grain boundaries, irregular and up 
to 2 mm in size, and fine inclusions within plagioclase. Biotite is fine grained, interstitial and 
makes  up  about  1  %  of  the  rock.  Quartz  and  plagioclase  are  present  at  60  %  and  35  % 
respectively. Muscovite makes up 5 % of the rock.  
5.2 Overview 
The rocks of the KEMB exhibit varying degrees of deformation and metamorphic grades. In 
summary, the amphibolite comprises a fine-grained mineral assemblage of hornblende, quartz 
and plagioclase. Hornblende and quartz are the dominant minerals and plagioclase occurs in 
low concentrations. Compositional banding is present in the rock and produces hornblende-
rich  and  quartz-rich  zones.  The  minerals  do  not  align  with  these  zones  and  rather  have  a 
granoblastic texture. The greenschist rocks are highly deformed and poses a strong fabric. A 
mineral assemblage of quartz-muscovite ±epidote ±chlorite makes up the rock. Quartz is the 
dominant  mineral  (>90%)  and  ranges  in  size  from  fine-  to  coarse-grained  in  the  various 
samples.  The  quartz  crystals  are  elongated  in  a  preferential  direction  which  is  parallel  to 
microcrystalline  zones  which  are  a  typical  feature  of  the  greenschist  rocks.  Within  the 
microcrystalline  zones,  minerals  such  as  muscovite,  iron  oxides,  epidote  and  chlorite  are 
present.  The  zones  vary  in  thickness  and  are  pervasive  throughout  the  rock.  The  migmatite 
has  a  mineral  assemblage  of  quartz-plagioclase-biotite-magnetite-monazite-sphene. 
Compositional banding is dominant feature of the migmatite with the separation of minerals 
into  leucosome  (quartz-plagioclase-magnetite-monazite-sphene)  and  melanosome  (biotite-
dominant) bands.  Biotite is elongated parallel to  the compositional bands. The meta-gabbro 
dykes  comprise  the  mineral  assemblage  actinolite-plagioclase-chlorite-sericite-muscovite. 
Crystals range in  size from  medium- to fine-grained with  course-grained actinolite in  parts. 
The  mineral  are  irregular  in  shape  and  inclusions  and  replacement  minerals  are  a  common 
feature in actinolite and plagioclase respectively. A fabric is not present in the samples. The 
34

--- Page 36 ---
diorite  has  an  equigranular  texture  comprising  a  mineral  assemblage  of  quart-plagioclase-
biotite-muscovite. Samples do not indicate deformation and the rock is relatively unaltered. 
35

--- Page 37 ---
6.  Mineralogical study 
6.1 XRD data 
Two  samples  (samples  A  &  B)  of  the  iron  stone  out  crop  were  analysed  by  XRD.  An 
interpretation  of  the  diffractograms  indicates  the  presence  of  magnetite,  hematite,  goethite 
and cassiterite (Fig. 6.1). Therefore there is the presence of iron and tin in the samples. 
6.2 Ore block study 
The study of the samples indicates an abundance of magnetite and hematite. Fractures are a 
dominant feature of the samples (Fig. 6.2a). The two minerals occur in close association with 
one  another.  The  composition  is  approximately  60  %  magnetite  and  40  %  hematite. 
Magnetite occurs as fine fragments with straight regular edges surrounded by hematite (Fig. 
6.2b). This textural relationship of the minerals indicates hematite is replacing magnetite. The 
hematite extends out from the fine fractures. In some parts magnetite is found in low amounts 
where it has almost been completely replaced. Cassiterite was not seen in the ore blocks. 
Samples  of  the  iron-rich  quartzite  indicate  a  similar  occurrence  of  magnetite  and  hematite. 
Due to the interstitial nature of the Fe-rich minerals (Fig. 6.3a & 6.3b), it has been determined 
that the minerals are secondary, possibly utilizing pore spaces. Hematite replaces magnetite 
in  a  very  similar  manner  to  the  above  example  (Fig.  6.3c  &  6.3d)  where  is  propagates  out 
from 
fractures.  
36

--- Page 38 ---
l
.
s
e
p
m
a
s
e
n
o
t
s
n
o
r
i
o
w
t
f
o
n
a
c
s
D
R
X
m
o
r
f
s
m
a
r
g
o
t
c
a
r
f
f
i
D
:
1
.
6
e
r
u
g
i
F
37

--- Page 39 ---
He 
Mg 
a.  
c 
500 μm 
b.  
200 μm 
Figure 6.2: Iron stone ore blocks in reflective light. a) highly fractured rock. b) hematite (light mineral-
He) replacing magnetite (dark mineral- Mg). 
Qtz 
Qtz 
MH 
MH 
Qtz 
Qtz 
a.  
Mg 
c.  
500 μm 
500 μm 
b.  
Qtz 
Qtz 
He 
200 μm 
d.  
Mg 
He 
Qtz 
Qtz 
200 μm 
Figure 6.3: Ferruginous quartzite. a) transmitted light through thin section showing quartz crystals (light 
mineral-Qtz) and interstitial magnetite and hematite (black mineral-MH). b) reflective light of 
ferruginous quartzite. c & d) fractures crystals with hematite replacement (light mineral-He) of 
magnetite (dark mineral-Mg). 
38

--- Page 40 ---
7.  Interpretation and discussion 
7.1 Protolith and depositional environment 
The metamorphosed sequences of the KEMB have been subjected to high stress and a range 
of  temperatures  which  is  evident  by  the  cleavage  and  metamorphic  facies  present.  The 
mineralogy of the metamorphosed rocks and the preservation of bedding are indicative of a 
sedimentary  protolith.  The  metamorphosed  rock  is  quartz  dominated  with  a  composition  of 
more than 90 % quartz. Other minerals present are muscovite, epidote, chlorite, hornblende 
and iron oxide. Bedding is dominantly planar, with cross-bedding features apparently absent, 
and ranges in thickness from a few centimetres to several metres. Within bedding, grain-size 
is  typically  uniform,  with  no  upward-  fining  or  coarsening  trend.  The  absence  of  typical 
sedimentary features such as cross-bedding and graded bedding may be attributed to the high 
degree  of  strain  accommodated  by  the  rocks.  In  the  east  of  the  northern  ridge  units,  the 
scattered  hillocks  of  coarser  units  surrounded  by  the  low  lying  finer  units  possibly  indicate 
lateral facies changes. 
The high silica content, in the form of quartz crystals and microcrystalline quartz, suggest a 
sandstone  protolith.  This  is  consistent  with  the  metamorphic  mineral  assemblage  of  quartz-
muscovite-iron  oxide±  chlorite±  epidote  (Nesse,  2000).  A  dominant  feature  throughout  the 
greenschist rocks is the anastomosing, microcrystalline zones which occur in thin section as 
dark bands with varying thickness (Fig. 5.2). A possible explanation for the microcrystalline 
zones is the formation of a fracture cleavage which utilises the less competent matrix (Spry, 
1969). Although no matrix is observed in thin section, the pervasive nature, varying thickness 
and  the  way  the  microcrystalline  zones  anastomose  around  quartz  crystals  suggests  the 
deformation of finer material (matrix) which was once present. Thin sections reveal that these 
microcrystalline zones make up 10 to 30 % of the rock depending on the sample and where in 
the  stratigraphy  it  is  located.  This  indicates  that  the  rock  originally  comprised  up  to  30  % 
matrix.  However,  volume  reduction  should  also  be  considered  if  the  stress  applied  on  the 
rocks was great. The protolith would therefore have been a quartzwacke (Fig. 7.1) based on 
the amount of matrix once present and the absence of lithic fragments and feldspathic grains 
(Boggs, 2006). 
39

--- Page 41 ---
Figure 7.1: Classification of sandstone (Boggs, 2006) 
The  KEMB  is  split  into  three  clastic  sedimentary  metamorphic  units,  namely  the  northern 
ridge,  southern  ridge  and  southern  region  units.  These  three  units  comprise  one  or  more 
successions with ranging grain size. The southern region (amphibolite) unit comprises a fine-
grained  succession.  The  dominant  metamorphic  overprint  has  destroyed  all  evidence  of 
sedimentary features such as bedding and grading sequences. Stratigraphically above this is a 
banded ironstone  formation  (BIF)  that consists of interbedded shale and iron precipitate.  In 
turn  stratigraphically  above  the  BIF,  the  southern  ridge  units  comprise  medium-  to  fine-
grained quartzite (Units A & B), overlain by a medium-grained quartzite (Unit C) grading up 
to  a  coarse-grained  quartzite  (Unit  D).  Overall,  there  is  an  increase  in  grain  size  over  a 
thickness  of  approximately  150  m.  The  northern  ridge  units  comprise  a  fine-  to  medium-
grained quartzite (Units X & Z) with a coarse, pebble like interbed (Unit Y). The eastern side 
of  the  northern  ridge  is  host  to  facies  changes,  of  high  and  low  energy.  Here  coarser 
sequences are located a largely predominant fine-grained sequence.  
Due  to  the  greenschist  facies  rocks  having  more  sedimentary  features  preserved  relative  to 
the  amphibolite  rocks,  they  are  more  useful  in  determining  the  depositional  environment. 
Considering the protolith of quartzwacke, which is extensive and occurs in beds up to a metre 
or more thick as well as the coarsening upward sequence in the southern ridge and pebble like 
nature  of  Unit  Y  between  Units  X  &  Z  of  the  northern  ridge,  a  deltaic  depositional 
environment  is  interpreted  (Reading,  1978).  The  overall  upward  coarsening  trend  of  the 
southern  ridge  is  indicative  of  a  progradational  deltaic  sequence  (Reading,  1978;  Leeder, 
1999).  However,  typical  channel  forms  and  shapes,  expected  in  a  deltaic  environments 
(Reading, 1978) are absent. In general, the fine sequences are representative of the distal bar 
to  prodelta  setting  (Leeder,  1999  and  Nichols,  2009).  The  medium-grained  sequences  are 
40

--- Page 42 ---
representative  of  the  sandy  distal  mouth  bar  while  the  coarse-grained  sequences  are 
representative of a gravelly proximal mouth bar to sandy distal mouth bar of a typical delta 
(Nichols,  2009).  The  interlamination  of  sands  and  silts  will  occur  between  the  sandy  distal 
bar mouth bar and the prodelta (Fig. 7.2).  
Figure 7.2: Coarse-grained delta (Nichols, 2009) 
Interpreting the sequences present in the greenschist ridges, a prograding delta would account 
for  the  overall  upward  coarsening  profile  (Fig.  7.2).  The  sequences  in  the  northern  ridge 
suggest progradation from a medium-grained to a course-grained/pebble sequence, followed 
by retrogradation to a medium-grained facies sequence. The deltaic environment determined 
from the metaclastic succession allows for the interpretation of the underlying banded iron-
formation  and amphibolite. Although definitive evidence of a  conformable contact  between 
the iron-formation and the metaclastics was not observed, the increase in metamorphic grade 
and  facing  direction  suggests  that  these  sequences  occur  lower  in  the  stratigraphy.  The 
occurrence of the banded ironstone formation is typical of shallow water environments of the 
Proterozoic (Leeder, 1999). This  would have occurred distal  to  a delta setting on a shelf or 
proximal to the delta during periods of reduced sedimentation. The fine-grained sediment of 
the amphibolite would have been deposited in the prodelta in the form of shales or mudstone.   
The  described  protoliths  of  quartzwacke,  shale  and  possible  pebble  quartz  arenite  fit  well 
with  the  sedimentary  rocks  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  and  in  particular  the  Oudalan-
Gorouol  greenstone belt  described by  Pons  et  al., 1995; Debat  et  al., 2003;  Tshibubudze et 
al.,  2009;  Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  submitted.  Therefore  the  sequences  described  may 
represent a portion of the Oudalan-Gorouol greenstone belt and this would also be enforced 
by the KEMB close proximity to the belt, to east of the Markoye shear zone, 
41

--- Page 43 ---
7.2 Metamorphic history 
The  overall  metamorphism  of  the  KEMB  increases  very  rapidly  in  grade  from  greenschist 
facies  in  the  north  to  amphibolite  facies  in  the  south.  The  mineral  assemblage  of  the 
greenschist  grade  rocks  are  quartz-muscovite-iron  oxide  ±  epidote  ±  chlorite.  Pressure-
temperature conditions specific to this assemblage are between 2 to 4 kbar at temperatures of 
250 to 450⁰C (Nesse, 2000). The amphibolite has the general mineral assemblage of quartz-
hornblende-plagioclase. This assemblage is typical of conditions of 2 to 5 kbar at temperature 
of  450  to  650  ⁰C  (Nesse,  2000).  These  conditions  are  satisfied  by  a  normal  geothermal 
gradient (Fig. 7.3). Thus subsidence and burial to suitable depth, by some or other process, 
would have resulted in the formation in the facies observed by regional metamorphism. 
Figure 7.3: Metamorphic facies and geothermal gradients (Nelson, 2003) 
Features  within  the  metamorphic  rock  assist  in  determining  how  metamorphism  occurred. 
The  greenschist  contains  bedding  parallel  foliation  which  is  defined  by  the  elongation  and 
alignment of quartz crystals and microcrystalline anastomosing zones, possibly representative 
of  where  pressure  solution  may  have  also  occurred.  Deformation  to  crystals  appears  to  be 
axial  which  is  indicated  by  the  absence  of  shearing  and  rotation  of  crystals.  Undulose 
extinction, grain elongation defining a foliation and recrystallisation, all exhibited by quartz 
crystals, are produced at low to moderate temperatures and pressures (Vernon, 1976; Vernon 
&  Clarke,  2008).  This  is  what  is  expected  in  greenschist  facies.  Under  experimental 
42

--- Page 44 ---
conditions,  using  axial  compression,  intragranular  recrystallisation  can  be  achieved  at 
temperatures of 300 to 400 ⁰C with confining pressures of 10 to 15 kbar in the presence of 
structural  hydroxide  (Vernon,  1976).  A  part  from  the  elongated  quartz  crystals,  strain  is 
largely contained within the matrix surrounding the grains in the quartz wacke (Spry, 1969). 
Deformation has formed a foliation in the rock which is described as closely spaced, irregular 
zones  which  anastomose  around  fragments  of  clastic  grains  (Fig.  16),  namely  quartz.  The 
formation of the foliation and grain elongation would have occurred resulting in volume loss 
under  compression.  This  foliation  is  sub-parallel  to  the  bedding  plane.  Bedding  parallel 
foliation  is  commonly  associated  with  shales  that  have  been  subjected  to  low  stress  during 
burial  under  normal  diagenetic  processes  (Vernon  and  Clarke,  2008).  However,  bedding 
parallel  foliation  in  the  metamorphosed  rocks  of  the  KEMB  is  in  quartz  wackes  that  have 
reached much greater depths as indicated by the greenschist facies mineral assemblage. 
The  amphibolite  comprises  quartz  and  hornblende  which  are  subhedral.  The  unit  contains 
prominent  compositional  banding  of  quartz-hornblende  and  quartz.  Hornblende  crystals  are 
not  preferentially  orientated  parallel  to  the  compositional  banding  (Fig.  15).  The 
compositional  banding  may  represent  either  original  depositional  features,  strain  induced 
banding forming a foliation or quartz veining that has been deformed. Quartz veining would 
be unlikely as the compositional banding is pervasive, fine and relatively regular. It would be 
highly unlikely for quartz veins to cut through the rock at such regular intervals to form what 
is  observed  as  banding.  The  possibility  of  the  banding  representing  bedding  features  of  the 
original  rock  is  something  to  consider  however  this  will  be  difficult  to  prove.  Considering 
what is seen in the above greenschist rocks which contain a strong fabric, it is interpreted that 
this  compositional  banding  was  also  induced  from  stress  related  to  the  formation  of  the 
greenschist foliation. The formation of isoclinal folds in the unit, with fold hinges parallel to 
foliation, formed during high compaction accommodation volume loss (Davis and Reynolds, 
1996). 
Previous  studies  of  the  metamorphism  in  the  WAC  concluded  regional  metamorphism  to 
greenschist facies occurred during crustal  shortening of the Eburnean Orogeny (Vidal  et  al, 
1996;  Beziat  et  al.,  2000;  Debat  et  al.,  2003;  Hein  et  al.,  2004;  Naba  et  al.,  2004). 
Metamorphism 
to  amphibolite  facies  was  concluded 
to  occurred  during  contact 
metamorphism by the emplacements of the various plutons (Pons  et  al., 1995;  Debat  et  al., 
2003;  Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009)  However  a  more  recent  study  in  the  Oudalan-Gorouol 
43

--- Page 45 ---
greenstone  belt  concluded  amphibolite  facies  was  reached  during  regional  deformation 
(Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted).  
To explain the metamorphic grade and deformation exhibited by the rocks of the KEMB, the 
following possibilities are proposed. 
1.  The rocks were deformed and metamorphosed during regional deformation events as 
proposed by  Tshibubudze and Hein  (submitted).  Attaining  bedding-parallel foliation 
would be difficult to achieve unless the rocks were orientated at  a high angle to  the 
primary  stress  direction.  This  would  have  occurred  either  during  SW  directed 
shortening  of  the  Tangaean  Event  or  SE-NW  shortening  of  the  Eburnean  Orogeny 
(Tshibubudze et al., 2009; Hein 2010; Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted). This would 
have  a  required  the  units  to  be  forced  into  a  steep  orientation  prior  to  one  of  the 
events. Following deformation, the units would then require subsidence and tilting.  
2.  Burial  to  depths  of  approximately  10  to  12  km.  Subsequent  metamorphism  and 
deformation  would  be  expected  due  to  the  geothermal  gradient  as  well  as  a  large 
amount  of  force  exerted  by  the  overlying  rocks  which  would  result  in  compaction. 
Producing  bedding-parallel  foliation  would  be  challenging  by  such  a  process  as  it 
would require the descent of rocks to a great depth remaining in the same position as 
they  were  deposited  in.  However  bedding-parallel  foliation  as  well  as  isoclinal  fold 
hinges  parallel to  the bedding plane is strong  evidence  for this  type of deformation. 
Thus  it  is  suggested  that  crustal  extension  following  deposition  resulted  in  the 
subsidence and burial  of the rocks of the KEMB. Thinning of the crust as well as a 
higher  geothermal  gradient  prosed  for  the  Precambrian  would  have  resulted  in 
subsequent metamorphism. 
3.  Contact  metamorphism  related  to  the  emplacement  of  a  pluton.  This  has  been 
proposed by Pons et al. (1995), Tshibubudze et al. (2009) and Tshibubudze and Hein, 
(submitted). However, this does not explain the presence of the foliation and therefore 
is not the favoured explanation. 
Regional  deformation  or  burial  metamorphism  could  explain  the  formation  of  foliation. 
However it is evident that the rocks of the KEMB did reach crustal levels great enough to 
achieve amphibolite facies and form compositional banding within the amphibolite rock.  
44

--- Page 46 ---
7.3 Migmatite formation 
A  migmatite  results  from  the  partial  melting  of  a  pre-existing  rock.  The  formation  of 
migmatites is generally associated with an increase in pressure and temperature as either an 
increase in  depth,  known as “static melting”, or  an increase in  differential  stress,  known as 
“dynamic melting” (Ashworth, 1985 and Sawyer, 2008). In the absence of free fluid, melting 
reactions occur at  granulite facies conditions,  typically at  temperature between 800 to  1000 
⁰C (Vernon and Clarke, 2008).  
However  the  occurrence  of  the  migmatite  in  the  KEMB  is  not  associated  with  a  typical 
increase in temperature and pressure along a geothermal as described above. This is due to its 
anomalous  position  between  greenschist  and  amphibolite  facies.  Outcrop  suggest  the 
migmatite has  little lateral  extent and is isolated to  an area of only several  hundred metres. 
The  closest  occurring  migmatite  in  the  surrounding  area  is  situated  approximately  20  km 
away on the northern margin of the Dori Batholith and is interpreted as the product of aureole 
deformation  during  the  emplacement  of  the  batholith  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  submitted). 
However aureole deformation is not indicated in the KEMB as there is no intrusion in contact 
with the migmatite. 
Figure 7.4: Diagram indicating the melting temperature of wet granite (David 
Magrass and Brian Wells, 2010) 
45

--- Page 47 ---
Another process by which a migmatite can form is during metasomatism (Sawyer, 2008). The 
presence of fluids is known to act as a flux and thus can reduce the melting temperature (Fig. 
7.4) by changing the solidus (Ashworth, 1985;Sawyer, 2008; Vernon and Clarke, 2008).  
Fluid interaction, to induce melting, can take place in two ways: 
1.  Metasomatism  before  melting  (Sawyer,  2008).  The  infiltration  of  metasomatic 
fluids  from  an  outside  source  involves  the  enrichment  of  the  rock  by  improving 
the  rock  fertility  (Vernon  and  Clarke,  2008)  thus  making  it  more  susceptible  to 
melting.  This  involves  hydrothermal  alteration  and  the  production  of  new 
minerals. The amount of water in the fluids leads towards the second type of fluid 
interaction.  
2.  Introduction  of  hydrous  fluids  from  an  external  source  known  as  H2O-saturated 
melting (Ashworth, 1985; Sawyer, 2008; Vernon and Clarke, 2008). The presence 
of  water  as  well  as  other  compounds  (such  as  P2O5,  HF,  LiOH)  can  drastically 
reduce the solidus temperature (Ashworth, 1985).   
Furthermore,  the  dehydration  of  hydrous  minerals  under  high  pressures  releases  water  into 
the rock and induces melting (Vernon and Clarke, 2008). Considering the KEMB and related 
pressure-temperature  conditions,  would  it  have  been  possible  to  produce  a  migmatite?  The 
migmatite  is  situated  between  the  greenschist  and  amphibolite  facies.  Here  temperatures 
would have been in excess of 450 ⁰C (c.f., Vernon and Clarke, 2008). The influx of fluids at 
these  temperatures  would  not  have  been  sufficient  to  induce  melting.  However  there  is  the 
presence  of  several  large  plutons  in  the  surrounding  area  which  include  the  Tin  Taradat 
granodiorite-tonalite,  Dori  batholith  and  the  Granite  Adamelite  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein, 
submitted).  These  could  have  been  the  source  of  high  temperature  igneous  related  fluids 
which would have infiltrated the surrounding rocks. These zones of infiltration would have 
had  to  be  concentrated  and  localised.  The  rapid  increase  of  temperature  in  pre-existing  hot 
conditions could have induced partial melting and dehydration of the rock. Migmatites from 
Saint-Malo, France, with a very similar mineral assemblage of muscovite-plagioclase-quartz 
leucosome and biotite-rich melanosome, are interpreted to have formed by the breakdown of 
muscovite (Sawyer, 2008). Although the Saint-Malo migmatites have been proposed to have 
formed  in  upper  amphibolite  facies,  the  presence  of  muscovite  in  the  metamorphosed  rock 
which formed the migmatite in KEMB would have been a source for more hydrous fluid. 
46

--- Page 48 ---
Another possibility is that the migmatites are bounded by shear zones and that fluids travelled 
along the structures and caused the partial melting.  
The occurrence of the KEMB migmatite is anomalous and somewhat challenging to interpret. 
However it can be summarised as a location of partial melting at granulite facies. The most 
suitable explanation for its occurrence is the influx of high temperature fluid from an external 
source, either from one of the plutons in the surrounding area or along strictures  along the 
margins of the migmatite. Associated with this was dehydration metamorphism and reactions. 
Why this occurred here, is the focus of future research studies in the region. 
 7.4 Tectonic History 
The  KEMB  is  host  to  metamorphosed  sedimentary  sequences  and  igneous  intrusions.  The 
terrain has been subjected to a series of regional tectonic events. The studies of Tshibubudze 
et al. (2009) and Tshibubudze and Hein (submitted) have indicated that the KEMB lies west 
of    the  Markoye  Shear  Zone  which  developed  by  at  least  two  regional  deformation  events. 
Understanding the tectonic history of the KEMB is beyond the scope of this project however 
based on the metamorphic and structural data collected, a simplified tectonic history can be 
suggested. Saying this, further studies will be crucial in acquiring a greater understanding of 
how the KEMB fits in with the regional geology. 
The  series  of  metamorphosed  sedimentary  units  have  reached  metamorphic  grades  of 
greenschist and amphibolite facies. An anomalous occurrence of a localised migmatite, which 
has  reached  granulite  facies,  lies  between  the  greenschist  and  amphibolite  and  adds 
complexity to the metamorphic belt. The metamorphosed sedimentary units are separated by 
areas of sand cover with little outcrop. Later intrusive phases are a feature of the KEMB with 
the presence of gabbro dykes cross-cutting the central region as well as the occurrence of a 
diorite pluton. 
The tectonic history of the KEMB is summarized below. 
1.  The deposition of the sedimentary units in a shallow marine, deltaic setting following 
the formation of a basin. The units include (amphibolite) a siltstone sequence, a BIF 
sequence,  (Unit  A)  a  sandstone  sequence,  (Unit  B)  an  interbedded  siltstone  and 
sandstone  sequence,  (Unit  C)  a  sandstone  sequence,  (Unit  D)  a  coarse-grained 
sandstone  sequence,  (Unit  X)  an  interbedded  siltstone  sequence,  (Unit  Y)  a  course-
grained sandstone and (Unit Z) an interbedded siltstone and sandstone sequence. 
47

--- Page 49 ---
2.  Burial of the sedimentary units was accompanied by compaction and metamorphism. 
Burial  occurred  to  a  depth  of  several  kilometres  as  determined  by  the  metamorphic 
facies  reached. The immense overlying weight  would  have exerted a  great  stress  on 
the rocks at such a depth, thus resulting in a pervasive bedding-parallel foliation (S1) 
and crystal lineation (L1).  
3.  Folding (F2) of the southwest units. The amphibolite, banded ironstone and southern 
ridge are host to a fold. F2 is defined in the amphibolite and banded ironstone in the 
south-eastern region. S1 is folded about F2. 
4.  Intrusion of gabbro dykes prior or during metamorphism of the metaclastic rocks. A 
petrology  study  on 
the  dykes  determined 
that 
there 
is  an  abundance  of 
actinolite/tremolite  present  and  an  absence  of  pyroxene.  Plagioclase  crystals  are 
commonly  altered  to  sericite.  The  presence  of  actinolite  and  altered  plagioclase  to 
sericite  suggest  metamorphism  to  greenschist  facies.  Thus  the  dykes  had  to  be 
intruded at depth in order to be metamorphosed it such facies. 
5.  Uplift  and  tilting  of  the  metamorphosed  sedimentary  units  and  dykes  to  the  north 
indicated by the dip of bedding-parallel foliation.  
6.  The intrusion of the diorite pluton. There are several granodiorite plutons that occur in 
the  surrounding  area  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  submitted).  The  most  likely  source  of 
the pluton in KEMB could be a  younger batholith related diorite intrusions south of 
the town of Gorom Gorom.  
7.  The  formation  of  the  ferricrete  horizons  followed  by  the  tertiary  sands.  Ferricrete 
horizons  in  the  WAC  formed  during  the  Cretaceous  and  associated  with  the 
development of in situ laterite (Brown et al., 1994; Burke and Gunnell, 2008). 
Suggestions  tectonic  uplift  is  proposed  due  to  the  result  of  either  one  of  two  events.  The 
emplacement of  the Dori  Batholith, preceding the Tangaean Event (Tshibubudze and Hein, 
submitted), to the southeast of the field area may have resulted in the uplift and tilting of the 
KEMB. This would have been due to the crust being pushed out and up to accommodate the 
large  volume  of  magma  being  emplaced  beneath.  The  northerly  dipping  bedding-parallel 
foliation of the metamorphosed units in the KEMB would agree with this. Another proposed 
event  is  the  NW-SE  crustal  shortening  of  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009 
and Tshibubudze and Hein, submitted) which may also have resulted in the uplift and tilting 
48

--- Page 50 ---
of the KEMB. The NW compression and resulting thrusting could have caused tilling of the 
stratigraphy to the north exposing deeper crustal levels. 
49

--- Page 51 ---
8.  Conclusions 
The  deformation  and  metamorphism  present  in  the  KEMB  is  complex  and  not  easily 
explained.  This  can  be  linked  to  the  series  of  tectonic  events  which  have  occurred  in  the 
region and the terrain that the KEMB exists in. In light of this, far more is now known about 
the KEMB and the outcomes of this project can lead to further work  in understanding how 
the KEMB fits in with the regional geology. 
The following conclusions are drawn about the KEMB. The rocks comprise metamorphosed 
sedimentary and intrusive rocks. The deposition of the sedimentary sequences occurred in a 
deltaic environment into a shallow marine setting. These rocks were subsequently  buried to 
an  estimated  deep  crustal 
level  where 
the  associated  pressures  and 
temperatures 
metamorphosed  the  rocks  to  greenschist  and  amphibolite  facies.  The  result  of  either 
compaction associated with the weight of the overlying rock and crustal shortening during the 
regional  deformation  events  formed  a  strong  foliation  in  the  sedimentary  sequences.  The 
intrusion of gabbro dykes and a diorite pluton occurred after such events. The tectonic uplift 
and  tilting  of  the  rocks  was  followed  by  erosion  and  the  formation  of  ferricrete  horizons 
leading to the exposer of the rocks as seen today.   
The  presence  of  an  iron  stone  and  ferruginous  quartzite  as  well  as  quartz-tourmaline  veins 
indicates  the  potential  for  economic  deposits.  The  surface  extent  of  these  outcrops  do  not 
suggest  a great  extent of the mineralisation. However the sign of such occurrences do raise 
interest for further research into possible large deposits of such kinds. 
50

--- Page 53 ---
10.
