
--- Page 2 ---
Abstract 
The  rocks  of  the  Oudalan-Gourouol  Greenstone  Belt  (OGGB)  are  largely  made  up  of 
supracrustal,  island-arc  derived  sediments  including,  but  not  limited  to,  thick  greywacke 
sequences. These were deposited in a deltaic-shelf environment on the margin of a back-arc 
basin.  The  local  stratigraphy  has  been  constrained  by  facies  variation  determined  by 
sedimentary  features  and  differences  in  the  depositional  environment.  Regional  low-middle 
greenschist  metamorphism  is  shown  by  the  ubiquitous  presence  of  chlorite,  epidote  and 
minor  muscovite  and  is  suggested  to  be  a  result  of  large  TTG  pluton  emplacement  that 
occurred  syn-tectonically  with  the  Eburnean  Orogeny.  This  thesis  proposes  it  is  due  to 
diastathermal  metamorphism  caused  by  back-arc  extension  and  mantle  upwelling.  Contact 
metamorphism of the greywacke to hornblende-hornfels facies occurs within close proximity 
of  the  calc-alkaline  dykes.  The  internal  structure  and  sedimentary  features  were  destroyed 
due  to  the  increase  in  temperature.  Two  deformation  events  occurred,  the  Tangaean  Event 
(2170-2130  Ma)  and  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (2130-1980  Ma)  that  caused  the  rocks  in  the 
OGGB to be folded twice. The Ludovic Fault System was a result of compression during the 
Eburnean Orogeny and gave rise to N-S trending, dextral-reverse structures. Dilation of these 
structures  occurred  due  to  compression  of  the  Eburnean  Orogeny.  Granodiorite  and 
monzodiorite  dykes  that  intruded  the  Palaeoproterozoic  sedimentary  rocks  were  emplaced 
pre-D1  and  underwent  deuteric  alteration.  They  contain  large,  euhedral  plagioclase  and 
altered  clinopyroxene  crystals  surrounded  by  a  groundmass  of  quartz  and  secondary, 
interstitial plagioclase. The high quartz content, approximately 80 %, in these dykes is due to 
crustal contamination during emplacement. 
1

--- Page 5 ---
2.0. Introduction 
2.1. Preamble 
The  study  area  is  situated  in  the  Oudalan-Gourouol  Greenstone  Belt  (OGGB)  in  north-east 
Burkina  Faso  (Fig.  1).  Besides  the  research  completed  by  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  which 
only encompassed a minor portion to the north of the study area, the study area has not been 
previously  mapped  or  described.    It  therefore  lacked  any  detailed  geological  interpretation.  
Hein et al. (2004), Tshibubudze et al. (2009) and Hein (2010) all referred to the controversy 
of stratigraphic “way up” in the West African Craton (WAC). Hirdes et al. (1996) concluded 
that the upper sequence of the Birimian is younger than the lower, whilst Milesi et al. (1991) 
stated  the  converse.  However,  Milesi  et  al.  (1989)  in  Hirdes  et  al.  (1996)  originally  agreed 
with  the  upper  sequence  being  younger.  Milesi  et  al.  (1989)  in  Bossiere  et  al.  (1996)  also 
considered that the upper Birimian may in fact be rocks of the Tarkwa Group. This idea was 
not supported by Leube et al. (1990), Hirdes et al. (1992) and Davis et al. (1994) who stated 
the  upper  and  the  lower  Birimian  are  similar  in  age.  Hein  et  al.  (2004)  concluded  that  the 
Goren  Greenstone  Belt  of  north-east  Burkina  Faso  is  made  up  of  metamorphosed  volcanic 
and pyroclastic rock units that are intercalated with metasedimentary rocks, thus revising the 
type section stratigraphy of that belt.   
This research focuses on different geological aspects and provides a holistic study of the field 
area.  Due  to  the  lack  of  field  work  in  the  region,  basic  stratigraphy  is  not  known  in  many 
parts  of  the  WAC.  However,  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (in  review)  have  established  a 
stratigraphy  for  the  OGGB  in  a  large  way.  The  study  area  characterizes  the  greywacke 
sequence,  establishes  its  internal  stratigraphy  and  looks  at  its  relationships  with  intrusive 
rocks that crop out throughout the region. The rocks in the field area are well exposed which 
is not the case for other parts of the belt, making correlation difficult.  
In order to determine the stratigraphy, a detailed sedimentological study was necessary. This 
was  to  distinguish  between  the  different  sedimentary  facies,  determine  lithologies  and  a 
depositional environment in which they formed. The project also considers the structure and 
metamorphism and the geochemistry of the igneous rocks which play an important role in the 
interpretation of the tectonic, magmatic and metamorphic conditions.   
4

--- Page 6 ---
2.2. Location and Physiography 
The study area is situated approximately 2 km east of the town of Markoye and is located 12 
km west of the international border of Niger and 38 km south of the border of Mali (Fig. 2).  
The town of Markoye is located at the divide between the Sahel and the Sahara; everything 
north of the town is considered to be the Sahara Desert. Thus, the field area is an arid and hot 
environment with much of the surface covered with sand and loose gravels making outcrop 
difficult to find in the low-lying areas. The areas of high relief however, are desert mountains 
that contain a large amount of rock which, unfortunately, was dominated by  loose boulders 
and very little in situ-outcrop.  
Figure 1: West African Craton (from Tshibubudze et al., 2009) 
5

--- Page 7 ---
N                      
     0              1 km 
Figure 2: Satellite image of the study area with UTM grid (www.googleearth.com) 
6

--- Page 8 ---
2.3. Aims 
  To establish a stratigraphic, magmatic and structural column for the study area. 
  To interpret a depositional environment. 
  To correlate localised structural features with regional tectonic events as described by 
Tshibubudze et al. (2009). 
  To determine whether there is a metamorphic grade change across the field area and 
understand its relationship with the intrusive material. 
2.4. Acronyms, Abbreviations and Standards 
Acronyms: 
WAC – West African Craton 
XRF – X-Ray Fluorescence 
ICP-MS – Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry 
GPS – Global Positioning System 
UTM – Universal Tranverse Mercator 
PPM – Parts Per Million 
REE – Rare Earth Elements 
LREE – Light REE 
HREE – Heavy REE 
LOI – Loss of Ignition 
Standards 
Chondrite (see appendix) 
7

--- Page 9 ---
3.0. Literature Review/Regional Geology 
3.1. Stratigraphy 
According to Harcöuet et al. (2007) in Hein (2010), the West African Craton (WAC) is made 
up  of  Palaeoproterozoic  volcaniclastics  and  metasediments  that  overlie  an  inferred  granite 
basement that is Archaean in age. Tshibubudze et al. (2009) and Hirdes et al. (1996) followed 
Junner’s (1935) subdivision to classify the rock formations so that the Birimian sequence is 
made up of two units; the Lower Birimian and the Upper Birimian. These authors stated that 
the  Lower  Birimian  consists  of  dacite,  meta-volcaniclastics,  greywacke  sequences 
interbedded  with  siltstone,  chert,  shale  and  chemical  sediments  which  have  undergone 
regional  metamorphism.  The  Upper  Birimian  comprises  tholeitic  basalts,  granitoidal  lavas 
and pyroclastic rocks. 
Milesi et al. (1991) and Leube et al. (1990) described the Tarkwa Group as clastic sediments 
that  have  undergone  regional  metamorphism.  These  authors  mentioned  that  the  Tarkwa 
Group formed as a result of erosion of Birimian rocks and overlies the Birimian Supergroup 
unconformably.  Milesi  et  al.  (1989,  1992)  stated  that  the  region  to  the  east  of  the  town  of 
Markoye  is  made  up  Tarkwa  Group  sediments.  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  disagreed  with 
these conclusions as the stratigraphy does not match the type section for the Tarkwa Group in 
Ghana (Milesi et al., 1989, 1991; Bossiere et al., 1996). 
Brown  et  al.  (1994)  in  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  calculated  through  istotopic  studies  that 
there  is  a  major  unconformity  between  the  Tarkwa  Group  sediments  and  the  overlying 
laterite,  which  formed  during  the  Cretaceous  but  was  eroded  to  form  glacis  in  the  Eocene-
Miocene (Beauvais et al., 2008). 
3.2. Sedimentology 
The Birimian Supergroup is described by Feybesse et al. (1990), Leube et al. (1990), Hirdes 
et  al.  (1996)  and  Milesi  et  al.  (1991,  1992)  and  is  largely  made  up  of  volcanics,  chemical 
sediments  and  greywacke  units  with  siltstone  interbeds.  In  comparison,  the  Tarkwa  Group 
8

--- Page 10 ---
according to Leube et al. (1990) and Milesi et al. (1991) is classified as being predominantly 
conglomerate units with smaller sandstone and phyllite units. 
The  formation  of  thick  greywacke  sequences  generally  relates  to  rapid  deposition  as  to 
disallow  sorting  of  material.  In  review  of  large  greywacke  units  in  modern  day  or  recent 
geological  environments,  the  Wanganui  Basin  in  New  Zealand  is  described  by  Carter  and 
Naish  (1998)  and  Proust  et  al.  (2005)  as  a  shallow  marine  environment  that  is  Plio-
Pleistocene  in  age.  The  basin  demonstrates  a  full  range  of  sedimentary  facies.  Carter  and 
Naish  (1998)  identified  that  equal  amounts  of  sedimentation  and  subsidence  are  necessary.  
Uplift  and  subsidence  were,  in  the  case  of  the  Wanganui  Basin,  controlled  by  eustatic 
changes which created an environment prone to rapid deposition. The Wanganui Basin sits in 
a  back-arc  setting  at  the  convergence  of  the  Pacific  Plate  with  the  Australian  Plate.  It  is 
possible  that  its  formation  occurred  in  the  same  environment.  Lithospheric  loading  and 
downwarping created by adjacent subduction is credited with basin formation. This resulted 
in thick units of greywacke being deposited which is similar and therefore significant for the 
East  Markoye  region.  The  tectonic  setting  of  the  Wanganui  Basin  is  described  in  detail  by 
Proust  et  al.  (2005).  They  explained  that  the  basin  is  situated  on  the  Australian  Plate 
approximately  200  km  behind  an  active  zone  of  subduction.  In  this  subduction  zone,  the 
Pacific  Plate  is  thrust  beneath  the  Australian  Plate  obliquely.  The  angle  of  subduction  has 
remained constant for about 25 million years and is responsible for the creation of large fault 
systems that lie between the fore-arc basin and the Wanganui Basin. According to Proust et 
al. (2005) the basin has a depth of 5 km; the sedimentary fill overlies basement rock which 
consists of a thick unit of greywacke that is Mesozoic in age. 
Reviewing 
literature 
that  describes  greywacke 
formation 
from 
the  Archaean  or 
Palaeoproterozoic is significant. Similar processes of formation could have occurred owing to 
the  same  environment  at  that  point  in  earth’s  history.  The  Pine  Creek  Inlier  of  northern 
Australia contains rocks  which are Palaeoproterozoic in age. It consists of metasedimentary 
rocks  and  volcanic  units  that  overlie  Archaean  granite  basement  (Needham  et  al.,  1988). 
Needham  et  al.  (1988)  stated  that  the  inlier  was  affected  by  compressional  and  extensional 
tectonism,  namely  orogeny  and  rifting  respectively.  This  tectonism  was  associated  with 
igneous  events  and  post-dated  all  sedimentation.  The  basin  that  makes  up  the  Pine  Creek 
9

--- Page 11 ---
Inlier  was  created  through  processes  of  extension  of  the  Archaean  crust.  After  rifting  took 
place,  sedimentation  up  to  10  km  thick  of  predominantly  clastic  and  chemical  sediments 
occurred.  Needham  et  al.  (op  cit.)  interpreted  sedimentation  to  have  taken  place  in 
environments  ranging  from  fluvial  to  inter-tidal.  The  Burrell  Creek  Formation  comprises  a 
thick, interbedded sequence of greywacke, siltstone, sandstone and shale that was affected by 
deformation  and  diastathermal  metamorphism.  It  is  the  result  of  deep  water,  high  energy 
environment.  Needham  et  al.  (1988)  stated  that  these  interbedded  units  make  up  only  a 
portion of the Bouma Cycle from a turbiditic origin.  
3.3. Intrusions 
Tshibubudze et al. (2009) studied and described the intrusive bodies in the northern region of 
Burkina  Faso.  The  Tin  Taradat  granodiorite  tonalite  is  intruded  by  the  Yacouba  Mafic 
Complex  (layered  pyroxenite  and  gabbro  suite).  The  tonalite  intruded  a  granite  adamellite 
west of the Markoye Shear Zone. To the east, it intrudes Palaeoproterozoic sedimentary and 
volcanic sequences (Tshibubudze and Hein, in review). A swarm of late dolerite dykes which 
trend WNW and NW cross-cut the supracrustal rocks of the Birimian Supergroup. They are 
dated at 250 Ma. Tshibubudze et al. (2009) classified dolerite dykes with the same trend in 
the north-east of Burkina Faso, at Essakane, which also cross-cut supracrustal rocks including 
greywacke and siltstone. Porphyritic monzonite dykes were identified in the north east part of 
Burkina Faso and these are the subject of current geochronological studies at the University 
of Western Australia (Tshibubudze and Hein, in review). 
3.4. Regional Tectonics 
The tectonism of the West African Craton has been studied in detail by Hirdes et al. (1996), 
Feybesse et al. (2006), Tshibubudze et al. (2009), Hein (2010) and Tshibubudze and Hein (in 
review).  Hirdes  et  al.  (1996)  and  Hein  et  al.  (2004)  agreed  that  the  Eburnean  Orogeny, 
described  by  Feybesse  et  al.  (2006)  formed  as  a  result  of  crustal  shortening  in  a  SE-NW 
direction.  This  was  due  to  the  closure  of  an  oceanic  basin  that  was  situated  between  two 
Archaean  cratons.  Deformation  during  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  lead  to  the  creation  of  shear 
zones which trend NE-SW. Tshibubudze et al. (2009) described the Markoye Shear Zone and 
the  Takabangou  Shear  Zone,  which  trend  NNE  and  are  steeply-east  dipping.  Hein  (2010) 
10

--- Page 12 ---
stated that there were in  fact  three phases of deformation; (1)  the Tangaean Event  which is 
the characterised by a north-west trending fold-thrust belt (2170-2130 Ma cf., Tshibubudze et 
al.,  2009;  Hein,  2010);  (2)  the  polycyclic  Eburnean  Orogeny  which  involved  continental 
collision  with the orogenic front and associated shear zones in a north-northeast orientation 
(2130-1980  Ma,  Feybesse  et  al.,  2006)  and  (3)  the  Wabo-Tampelse  Event  which  is 
characterised  by  dextral  reverse  thrusts  and  WNW-trending  shears  and  folds  (undated  cf., 
Hein et al., 2004; Hein, 2010). 
3.5. Metallogenesis 
Gold  mineralisation  in  the  WAC  is  classified  into  five  different  processes  of  formation  by 
Milesi et al. (1989) which was reviewed by Beziat et al. (2008) and Hein and Matabane (in 
review). These classifications are: (1) Mineralisation that occurs in tourmalinised turbidites; 
(2)  Mineralisation  of  intrusive  rocks  that  occur  within  disseminated  sulphides;  (3) 
Conglomerates which host gold; (4) Lode gold where the gold is formed within arsenopyrite; 
(5) Lode gold hosted in quartz veins where the gold is in its native state. Milesi et al. (1992) 
modified their own original classification to just three components as described in Beziat et 
al. (2008). In this classification, gold mineralisation is described in terms of regional tectonic 
events  where  mineralisation  is  pre-orogenic,  syn-orogenic  or  post-orogenic.  According  to 
Beziat et al. (2008), gold in Burkina Faso, in particular is found within or near quartz veins 
which  suggests  that  the  deposits  form  epigenetically.  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  described 
gold mineralisation at Essakane and observed that it exists in stockwork veins that are made 
up  of  quartz  and  carbonate  material.  Tshibubudze  et  al.  (2009)  explained  that  Essakane 
goldfield hosts gold-bearing veins in an anticline that formed in D1 and was dilated in D2.   
11

--- Page 13 ---
4.0. Methodology 
4.1. Field Methodology 
Before  going  into  the  field,  basic  analysis  of  the  study  area  was  completed  using  satellite 
images from Google Earth® in order to determine the most efficient way of doing fieldwork.  
Fieldwork was conducted in January 2011. Line and rosette traverses were completed as this 
was the most effective way of mapping the lithologies, contacts and structural features. It was 
also  the  best  way  of  correlating  them  over  the  entire  the  field  area.  Field  mapping  was 
undertaken with a compass clinometer to measure bedding features of the sedimentary units 
such  as  dip  and  strike.  A  GPS  recorded  the  co-ordinates  of  the  station  points  (UTM  grid 
system, WGS 84). 
Structural  mapping  was  completed;  faults  were  traced  out  as  far  as  possible,  and  the 
orientations and sense of displacement was determined by measuring slickenlines on the fault 
plane with the compass clinometer. The location of fold axes was established by measuring 
the  dip  direction  of  beds  and  establishing  facing  direction  using  sedimentary  features.  The 
station points and geological features recorded in the field were plotted on a satellite image of 
the  study  area  to  allow  for  progressive  visual  understanding  of  the  geology  as  the  study 
continued. 
Photographs were taken at most localities. They were necessary and useful when interpreting 
the  geology.  Each  photograph  taken,  corresponded  to  a  specific  station  point  and  field 
description. This made the interpretation easier, by simply  referring back to a certain point.  
Selected rock samples were collected for geochemical study, thin section petrography, correct 
identification  of  lithologies,  and  for  the  building  of  a  comprehensive  stratigraphic  column.  
All  data,  including  diagrams,  station  points,  GPS  co-ordinates,  bedding,  structural  features 
and full descriptions of the geology were recorded in a notebook that was used in the write up 
of the project. 
12

--- Page 14 ---
Geological and geomorphologic maps (Fig. 3 and Fig. 5 respectively) were created to depict 
what geology and physiographic features occur in the field area. A stratigraphic column was 
also constructed (Fig. 4) from the geological map. 
4.2. Laboratory Methodology 
Three granodiorite-quartz monzonite samples were submitted for geochemical analysis. This 
analysis included XRF, which tested for major and trace elements and ICP-MS which tested 
for  trace  elements.  The  analyses  were  completed  at  the  Earth  Lab  at  the  University  of  the 
Witwatersrand.  The  samples  were  prepared  for  XRF  geochemical  analysis  which  works  in 
the following method: 
Summary of XRF Analysis (in house, unpublished). 
 Major Analysis 
All major elements were analyzed for, on an infinitely thick fused disk. 
Preparation of the fused disk: 
1.  All samples were ignited at 1000oC for 40 minutes and the LOI was calculated. 
2.  The  ignited  sample  was  mixed  with  a  commercially  available  pre-ignited  flux  (with 
composition  Li2B4O7  = 47%,  Li2CO3 = 36.7%, La2O3 =16%) in  the ratio of 1:5  and 
fired for 40 minutes at 1000oC. 
3.  This was then poured and pressed by a mechanical press into a fused disk. 
13

--- Page 16 ---
The  elemental  concentrations  were  obtained  by  comparison  to  13  known  standards.    The 
standards  used  included:  W2,  GSP1,  BHVO2,  AGV2,  G2,  DTS1,  PCC1,  BCR2,  NIM  N, 
NIM P, NIM S, NIM D, NIM G.  A synthetic internal standard was run after every 5 analyses 
to monitor and compensate for instrumental drift. 
 Trace Analysis 
All trace elements were analyzed for on an infinitely thick pressed pellet. 
1. Preparation of the pressed pellet: 
Approximately  6g  of  sample  was  mixed  with  three  drops  of  4%  commercially  purchased 
Mowiol (polyvinyl alcohol).  This mixture was then pressed under 10 ton pressure into an Al 
cup using a 40 ton press.  The pressed pellet was allowed to dry for 24 hours prior to analysis. 
Data Collection: 
All data collection was performed on a PANalytical PW2404 WD XRF with a Rh tube set at 
50kV  and  50mA.    The  instrument  parameters  for  each  element  were  as  per  the 
recommendations outlined by the software Protrace ®. 
PANalytical software Protrace® was used to process the raw data.  The standards used for the 
calibration were the standards supplied by PANalytical.   Protrace® drift standards were run 
after every five analyses to compensate for instrument drift. Internal checks were performed 
by analyzing known standards as unknowns and comparing them to reported concentrations.  
The known standards used were AGV2, BHVO2, GSP2, NIM D and NIM S. 
4.3. Petrography 
Thin section petrography  was completed on the  collected samples. Analysis of  sedimentary 
provenance and  metamorphic  grade was completed. The igneous rocks  were  also  identified 
and classified. Each thin section was systematically analysed, in particular, when identifying 
minerals, to ensure consistency and accuracy. Firstly, it was necessary to decide whether the 
15

--- Page 17 ---
rock  was  igneous,  metamorphic  or  sedimentary.  For  unknown  minerals,  a  mineral 
identification book was used as well as the following identification tools: 
  Relief 
 
Interference colours 
  Pleochroism 
  Cleavage 
  Twinning. 
  Extinction angle 
 
Interference figure. 
Photographs of the thin sections were taken as when necessary. For sedimentary rocks, grain 
shape, size and modal abundance of clasts and matrix were analysed in order to classify the 
rocks successfully. 
A modal abundance of the minerals was undertaken. For the igneous samples, the Streckeisen 
diagram (Streckeisen, 1976) was used to identify the rock and for sedimentary samples, the 
Dott  classification  (Dott,  1964).  Using  geochemical  data  for  the  igneous  rocks,  the 
Streckeisen  diagram  was  created,  after  the  values  had  been  normalised  according  to  the 
CIPW  norm.  The  two  diagrams  could  then  be  compared  to  each  other.  Le  Maitre’s 
classification (Le Maitre, 1989) was also completed using total alkalis versus silica content in 
weight percent. A spider diagram was created using the XRF trace data and a REE plot using 
the ICP-MS trace elements.  
16

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 3: Geological map of the field area showing structural and bedding data and 
lithologies. 
17

--- Page 19 ---
Lithologies 
Sand/Alluvium   
Palaeosands 
Ferricrete 
Monzodiorite   
Granodiorite- quartz monzodiorite 
Deformation 
True Thickness 
? 
? 
30 m 
D2 
D1 
Greywacke 
1432 m 
Dembam Conglomerate Member 
7 m 
Greywacke 
2363 m  
Figure  4:  Schematic  tecto-stratigraphic  column  showing  lithologies,  deformation  events  and  true 
thicknesses of the units. 
. 
18

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 5: Geographical map representing ridges and river beds (tracks are not included) 
19

--- Page 21 ---
5.0. Lithologies 
The geology of the study area consists of metamorphosed and folded sedimentary sequences 
as well as igneous intrusions. The geology is best expressed on ridges to the east and south-
east of the town of Markoye. In-situ outcrop is difficult to locate because approximately 95 % 
of the exposed rock mass is made up of dislodged boulders and blocks (Figs. 6 a & b). This 
made  retrieving  accurate  measurements  difficult.  In  the  low  lying  areas  there  is  very  little 
outcrop because the rocks are largely covered by  sand and  colluvium. However, outcrop in 
the  low  relief  areas  tends  to  be  more  reliable  because  it  is  in-situ.  Overall,  the  entire 
sedimentary package in the study area is composed of greywacke. This is determined by the 
abundance of quartz, plagioclase, K-feldspar and accessory minerals such as clinopyroxene. 
However, some units could be classified as lithic greywackes because they are dominated by 
lithic fragments and other units as a gritstone-greywacke due to their gritty, coarse texture.  
The  meta-greywacke  is  quartz  and  feldspar-rich,  medium-to-coarse-grained,  poorly  sorted 
and  has  exceptionally  well  preserved  sedimentary  features  in  most  outcrops.  Sedimentary 
features include cross-bedding, truncated beds, slump folding, scour and fill structures, flame 
structures and gradational fining upwards sequences. Bedding-facing relationships were used 
to determine stratigraphic way-up and many of these sedimentary features proved to be good 
indicators  for  facing  direction.  There  was  a  visible  amount  of  variation  in  terms  of 
composition, grain size, and sorting. 
Upward fining sequences are present on a scale, ranging from 3-15 centimetres per cycle of 
deposition. The cycles are often truncated (a scour base), by the next one. Cross-bedding is 
seen  at  almost  all  outcrops  and  varies  in  scale  from  centimetres  to  metre  scale.  The  cross-
bedded greywacke exhibits differential flow direction. All depict younging direction towards 
the east when not near a fold hinge. Truncated beds, upward-fining sequences, scour and fill 
and less commonly, flame structures aided in understanding and determining facing direction.  
Fine,  thinly  laminated  mud  drapes  were  intercalated  with  the  greywacke  throughout  the 
sequence.  Thin  chert  beds  exist  but  were  often  broken  up  and  suspended  in  the  overlying 
sedimentary  rocks  as  rip-up  clasts  (intraclasts).  The  greywackes  are  deposited  as  turbidites 
and have consistent fining upwards sequences. This suggests that each unit is deposited under 
20

--- Page 22 ---
the influence of gravity and makes up part of the Bouma Cycle (Bouma, 1962).  In the field 
area,  the  bottom  layers  of  the  cycle  was  seen;  (1)  massive  and  graded;  (2)  plane  parallel 
laminae and (3) ripples, wavy or convoluted laminae (Bouma, 1962; Shanmugam, 1997). 
There is a variable amount of orthoclase in most samples, (modal abundance ranging from 2-
15%)  as  shown  by  very  prominent  Carlsbad  twinning  and  the  typical  smoky  grey  to  white 
colourations.  Granophyric  texture  in  some  clasts  provided  evidence  of  simultaneous  rapid 
growth  of  quartz  and  alkali  feldspars  in  the  source  rock  region  (Barker,  1970).  Perthitic 
textures  were  also  evident  in  some  clasts  indicating  that  the  clast  source  region  underwent 
exsolution between plagioclase and K-feldspars (Nesse, 2000). Clinopyroxene was present in 
most of the samples in a relatively high abundance of 5-10%. They are 0.2 to 1.5 millimetres 
in length, subhedral, are twinned and occasionally exhibit alteration rims.   
Epidote and chlorite are present in all the samples and indicate metamorphism to greenschist 
facies.  Hornblende  exists  in  some  of  the  greywackes,  although  in  low  proportions,  and  is 
interpreted  to  be  detrital  grains  derived  from  the  source  rock  region.  The  greywacke  units 
have  undergone  ferruginization  in  localised  areas.  This  is  noticeable  due  to  iron  staining, 
which is  prominent throughout  the rock. Muscovite appears as an  alteration mineral  in  low 
proportions, less than 2 %. 
A  matrix-supported,  polymict  conglomerate  member  (hereafter  termed  the  Dembam 
Conglomerate Member), with a thickness of ten metres, is interbedded within the greywacke. 
It  crops  out  in  the  north  of  the  field  area  as  a  cobble  conglomerate.  The  unit  strikes  north-
south  and  thins  out  towards  the  south.  The  cobbles  are  sub-angular  to  sub-rounded  and 
cemented in a cross-bedded matrix of poorly sorted and coarse-grained greywacke. There is a 
variety of cobbles making up this conglomerate such as fuchsitic chert, black chert, granite 
(sensu-stricto)  basalt,  andesite,  finely  laminated  sandstone  interbedded  with  mudstones  that 
host small-scale slump folds, quartz vein, and quartz-rich meta-sediments. The conglomerate 
is similar to that described by Tshibubudze and Hein (in review) and is the focus of current 
geochronology studies at the University of Western Australia. 
21

--- Page 27 ---
Samples  of  intrusive  rocks  in  the  field  area  and  other  parts  of  the  greenstone  belt  were 
geochemically analysed by Tshibubudze and Hein (submitted). They are classified according 
to  Streckeisen  (Streckeisen,  1976)  as  monzodiorite  to  quartz  monzodiorites.  These  dykes 
crosscut  the  field  area  and  trend  east-west.  They  were  folded.  They  have  a  width  ranging 
between  30-50  metres.  They  consist  of  large,  euhedral  plagioclase  crystals,  up  to  2 
centimetres in size, within a groundmass of hornblende, quartz and clinopyroxene. The dykes 
are dark coloured, medium-grained rocks that have a porhyritic texture. They have undergone 
metamorphism  to  the  middle  greenschist  facies  as  shown  by  the  presence  chlorite  and 
epidote. The chlorite is commonly seen replacing large plagioclase crystals. 
Euhedral,  deuterically  altered  plagioclase  phenocrysts  exhibit  remnant  albite  twinning. 
Clinopyroxene  occurs  in  variable  amounts  but  usually  between  15  and  30  %  modal 
abundance.  The  clinopyroxene  shows  alteration  rimming,  twinning  and  less  commonly 
exsolution  lamellae.  There  are  smaller  (0.1-0.3  mm),  subhedral  to  anhedral,  unaltered 
plagioclase crystals with albite twinning and small, interstitial quartz that comprises the inter-
cumulus minerals.  
A granodiorite to quartz monzodiorite dyke also crosscuts the study area. It is approximately 
50 m wide and consists of large plagioclase crystals, both rounded and subhedral to euhedral 
in shape. There is a 10-20 %, visible proportion of alkali feldspar and quartz. In hand sample, 
hornblende  and  clinopyroxene  are  visible.  An  east-west  profile  was  conducted  across  the 
intrusion to establish if the dyke was originally a sill. No significant change in crystal size or 
composition  was  observed.  A  partially  bleached  contact  is  seen  in  a  river  bed.  Hornfels  is 
situated proximal to the dyke. Micro-veins or brecciation is visible which appears to be a chill 
margin.  However,  it  occurs  only  on  the  dyke  and  not  within  the  hornfels.  At  the  contact, 
plagioclase  phenocrysts  are  not  as  large  and  are  more  commonly  euhedral  rather  than 
rounded. In thin section, it shows an altered, lower-middle-greenschist metamorphosed rock. 
It has an abundance of interstitial quartz, mostly less than 20 % plagioclase and long bladed 
crystals  of  hornblende.  Some  occurrences  have  secondary,  unaltered,  smaller,  anhedral 
plagioclase. It has a porphyritic texture shown by a fine-grained groundmass that surrounds 
large plagioclase phenocrysts. There are quartz inclusions within the altered plagioclase. This 
plagioclase  exhibits  relic  albite  twinning.  Clinopyroxene  makes  up  approximately  10  %  of 
26

--- Page 28 ---
the rock and is rimmed by hornblende. Chlorite replaces hornblende. There is a high quartz 
concentration (~85-90 %) in a number of the granodiorite samples, which can interpreted as 
crustal contamination or wall-rock interaction during emplacement. 
The  dykes  crop  out  throughout  the  OGGB  and  host  gold  mineralisation  just  north  of  the 
Essakane  goldfield  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  in  review).  They  are  deuterically  altered 
indicating low temperature metasomatism related to primary mineral changes in the magma 
before  solidification.  The  crystals  remain  the  same  in  composition  but  are  essentially 
destroyed as the mineral begins to break down compositionally (Neuerburg, 1958). This type 
of  alteration  is  common  and  can  affect  mafic  to  felsic  rocks  during  crystallisation.  An 
example  where  deuteric  alteration  affects  quartz  monzonites,  similar  in  composition  to  the 
dykes  of  the  field  area,  is  from  the  Boulder  Batholith  in  Montana,  USA.  In  this  case,  the 
alteration is related to the formation of ore deposits hosted within the intrusion (Neuerburg, 
1958). 
27

--- Page 29 ---
6.0. Structure and Metamorphism: 
The field area has been metamorphosed to lower- middle greenschist facies as shown by the 
ubiquitous  presence  of  chlorite  and  epidote.  There  is  no  apparent  fabric  in  the  samples.  
Metamorphic  derived  micas  and  amphiboles  are  lacking.  A  fabric  at  such  low  grade  with 
fine-grained minerals (epidote and chlorite) would develop only a vague mineral alignment, 
if  any  (Prof.  Cawthorn,  pers.  comms.).  In  thin  section,  a  slight  fabric  is  visible,  where 
minerals are aligned but this occurs adjacent to quartz-filled fractures and not as a result of 
metamorphism.  The sediments  that are  situated approximately 20 metres  or less away from 
dykes  have  undergone  contact  metamorphism  to  hornblende-hornfels  facies,  where  no 
internal structure or primary bedding can be seen (i.e., grains and sedimentary features) (Fig 
8). The hornfels is fine grained (less than 0.1 mm). However, more often than not, these rocks 
express  their  sedimentary  character  as  compositional  variation,  as  seen  on  weathered 
surfaces. The rocks are silicified and glassy. 
The  field  area  and  the  OGGB  do  not  exhibit  the  correct  criteria  for  large-scale  contact 
metamorphism.  One  would  expect  to  see  a  prominent  zonation  to  an  igneous  mass.  In  the 
case  of  the  Pine  Creek  Inlier,  a  zonation  from  hornfels  to  greenschist  is  mappable,  with  a 
definable  biotite  isograd  (Hein,  2003).  Burial  metamorphism  is  an  active  process  which 
would  have  involved  basin  subsidence  and  a  resulting  increase  in  the  geothermal  gradient.  
There  would  be  an  increase  in  pressure  and  temperature  as  well  as  the  development  of 
bedding parallel cleavage at depth (Vernon and Clarke, 2008). Cleavage is not present in the 
rocks,  even  at  a  petrographic  scale  and  there  is  no  mineral  fabric  suggesting  burial 
metamorphism.  Diastathermal  metamorphism  better  explains  the  process  of  metamorphism 
for the rocks in the OGGB.  
With respect to the greywacke, hornblende occurs in minor proportions. The hornblende does 
not  exhibit  any  foliation,  which  suggests  it  was  derived  from  an  igneous  source  that  was 
deposited as detrital grains. The metamorphism in the field area correlates with Tshibubudze 
et  al.  (2009)  and  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (in  review)  who  concluded  greenschist 
metamorphism  is  dominant  throughout  the  OGGB.  The  metamorphic  grade  of  most  of  the 
greenstone  belts  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  have  been  described  as  greenschist  facies 
28

--- Page 30 ---
(Bossiere  et  al.,  1996;  Hirdes  et  al.,  1996;  Beziat  et  al.,  2000).  On  a  cratonic  scale,  the 
Eburnean  Orogeny  and  the  emplacement  of  numerous  large,  calc-alkaline  plutons  is 
suggested  to  be  responsible  for  a  regional,  low-grade  metamorphic  terrane  (Bossiere  et  al., 
1996;  Hirdes et  al.,  1996;  Beziat et  al.,  2000).  There  is  no evidence to  suggest  that  contact 
metamorphism occurred on such a large scale that would give rise to these greenschist-facies 
rocks  within  the  field  area.  The  rocks  of  the  OGGB  were  subjected  to  greenschist  facies 
conditions with the exception of a few localities where amphibolite and granulite facies was 
attained, adjacent to plutons (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). 
With respect to structure, the gold deposits in the OGGB are structurally constrained within 
shear zones and their associated splays (Tshibubudze et al., 2009; Tshibubudze and Hein., in 
review). The entire sequence of greywacke was folded and re-folded during two deformation 
events. Field data collected on bedding-facing relationships shows that around the fold hinges 
the  beds  dip  and  face  in  opposite  directions,  compared  to  the  rest  of  the  region  where 
everything faces and dips toward the east. There are small scale m-folds where beds dip and 
face in alternating directions over 5 to 10 metre intervals. The axial plane of a macroscopic 
thrust fold trends NNE. 
There is a N-S trending fault system that traverses the field area with minor subtending splay 
faults,  hereafter  termed  the  Ludovic  Fault  System.  Field  measurements  of  down  dip 
slickenlines,  accretion  steps  on  the  fault  plane  and  large  scale  S-C  fabrics  indicate  that  the 
faults  were  displaced.  Dextral-normal  displacement  occurred  with  the  western  block  up 
relative to the downward moving eastern block. There is a large quantity of quartz, with saw-
tooth crystal growth (open-spaced fill). The quartz is often dark in colour due to high stress, 
and was found around the areas of faulting which allows for relatively simple mapping of the 
fault  plane.  Bleached  greywacke  is  also  found  in  abundance  around  the  fault  plane.  This 
suggests  that  fluid  had  moved  through  the  rock  mass.  The  main  fault,  which  trends  from 
north-south, has an anticlockwise flexure, which was validated by measuring strike changes 
of the greywacke along its length. East-west and north-south trending fractures and joints are 
common in the area. The presence of open space quartz, a S-C fabric, down dip slickenlines 
and accretion steps indicate that the Ludovic Fault System is an extensional fault.  
29

--- Page 31 ---
An  equal  area  stereographic  projection  (Fig.  9)  of  the  poles  to  planes  of  the  bedding  data 
represents two broad clusters which straddle a calculated girdle of 111°53°S. The spread of 
polar data about the primitive circle is the result of folding in D1 and D2 (c.f., Tshibubudze et 
al.,  2009;  Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  in  review).  The  outlier  poles  are  interpreted  as  being 
affected  by  drag  folding  against  local  faults  which  changed  the  polar  orientations 
dramatically.  
The  stereographic  projection  of  poles  to  bedding  correlates  well  with  data  provided  by 
Tshibubudze et al. (2009) who concluded the rocks of the OGGB  were deformed and folded 
by two deformation events i.e. the Tangaean Event and the Eburnean Orogeny. To determine 
the mean fold axis, the data was split into the different fold limbs.  
Figure 9: Stereographic projection of poles of the bedding data. 
30

--- Page 32 ---
7.0. Geochemistry of Igneous Rocks 
Normalising  the  major  elements  to  the  CIPW  norm  and  calculating  the  percentages  of 
quartz, plagioclase and orthoclase for the samples, gave results of granodiorite to quartz 
monzodiorite  on  the  Streckeisen  diagram  (see  Fig.  10a).  For  the  rocks  termed 
monzodiorite  to  quartz  monzodiorite,  geochemical  results  from  Tshibubudze  and  Hein 
(submitted)  were  used.  All  these  results  place  these  rocks  within  a  calc-alkaline  field 
according  to  Streckeisen  (1976).  Figure  10b  shows  the  major  elements  plotted  on  the 
same  graph,  but  instead  of  using  the  CIPW  norm,  modal  abundances  from  thin  section 
analysis were determined. There is a slight variation between the two sets of results which 
can be explained by the fact that the CIPW norm is a theoretical estimate that has a higher 
margin  of  error.  This  is  why  it  is  necessary  to  compare  those  results  with  modal 
abundances. Overall, the samples are calc-alkaline in composition, which indicates a good 
correlation between the data. 
Figure  10  a  &  b:  Classification  of  samples  KH/LP/145,  KH/LP/147  and  KH/LP/148  on  a 
Streckeisen Diagram after Streckeisen (1976) using the CIPW norm and modal abundance. 
31

--- Page 33 ---
Plotting total alkalis against silica content (see Fig. 11) yielded slightly different results but 
essentially  the  samples  still  fall  within  the  granodiorite  field  of  the  Le  Maitre  (1989) 
classification system. Sample KH/LP/145 and KH/LP/147 are very similar in composition on 
both classification diagrams; however they are more granitic in composition according to the 
total alkalis versus silica. Whereas sample KH/LP/148 on the Streckeisen diagram is situated 
on the field boundary between a granodiorite and a quartz- monzodiorite and on Le Maitre’s 
classification it is well within the granodiorite field. 
Figure 11: Total alkalis versus Silica Diagram after Le Maitre (1989). 
The trace element data of the granodiorite to  quartz monzodiorite is represented as a spider 
plot (see Fig. 12), with the sample composition values in ppm normalised to chondrite. The 
elements  are  ordered  on  the  x-axis  in  increasing  incompatibility.  There  is  a  large  negative 
anomaly  for  nickel  in  all  three  samples.  The  plots  are  almost  identical  which  shows  good 
32

--- Page 34 ---
correlation and consistency within the dyke. There is an initial decrease from Sc but it rises 
again after Ni and the overall trend is an increase in the order from more compatible to more 
incompatible.  
Figure 12: Graph showing trace element concentration in order of increasing incompatibility 
(left to right). 
33

--- Page 35 ---
These data are normalised against chondrite meteorites, as its average composition represents 
the best  approximation for a complete solar abundance.  The graph (Fig.  13) is  plotted on a 
semi-log  scale  to  show  the  exponential  variation  between  LREE  and  HREE  relative  to 
chondrite. The REE plot overall shows a decrease of one order of magnitude from LREE to 
HREE. From La to Eu there is a steep decline in concentration from which point the HREE 
start  to  level  out  and  remain  fairly  constant.  Both  the  LREE  and  the  HREE  are  enriched 
relative to chondrite, which is constant on the line y=1. However, relative to each other, the 
LREE are more enriched. Small, negative Eu anomalies are visible for sample KH/LP/ 145 
and KH/LP/148, but are not very significant due to their size.  It is possible that because there 
is a slight enrichment in Gd in these rocks, that Eu appears to be anomalously lower relative 
to Gd. 
Figure 13: Graph depicting the REE concentrations in the quartz-monzodiorites. 
The  geochemical  and  thin  section  analyses  provide  a  classification  of  the  intrusive  rocks.  
Even  though  there  is  a  slight  variation  between  the  two  Streckeisen  ternary  plots  and  Le 
34

--- Page 36 ---
Maitre’s  total  alkali  versus  silica  graph,  all  the  samples  result  in  being  calc-alkaline  in 
composition.  This  falls  within  the  tonalite-trondjemite-granodiorite  (TTG)  suite  that 
characterizes most of the Palaeoproterozoic plutonic bodies of the WAC.   
These  rocks  are  intermediate  intrusives  and  therefore  have  a  higher  concentration  of 
incompatible  elements  compared  to  a  mafic  composition,  because  these  incompatibles 
preferentially partition into the liquid phase until they are forced to crystallise. True granites 
will have higher concentration of incompatible elements. The anomalous nickel concentration 
in the spider plot is a result of its compatibility with the mineral olivine. By the time enough 
differentiation and fractionation due to partial melting occurs to produce intermediate-felsic 
compositions,  Ni  has  already  been  used  up  in  the  production  of  mafic  rocks.  Cr  also 
preferentially  partitions  into  orthopyroxene  crystals  when  mafic-ultramafic  magmas  are 
crystallising and therefore has a negative anomaly in these samples.  
The  REE  data  normalised  to  chondrite  shows  a  magma  that  had  an  overall  enrichment 
relative  to  chondrite.  It  also  had  a  larger  enrichment  in  LREE  relative  to  HREE.  This  is 
indicative  of  intermediate-felsic  rocks  as  all  the  incompatible  elements  are  retained  in  the 
melt until they are forced to crystallise. A number of partial melting cycles will have occurred 
before  this  magma  formed  as  it  does  not  represent  ultramafic-mafic  magmas  but  rather 
magmas that make up continental crustal material. Small Eu anomalies occur in the REE plot. 
This indicates that Eu most likely replaced Ca in the plagioclase crystal structure during the 
last phase of crystallisation. 
35

--- Page 37 ---
8.0. Depositional Environment 
There  are  two  major  stratigraphic  sequences  in  this  region  of  the  OGGB;  a  thick  lithic-
feldspathic  greywacke  and  an  interbed  of  conglomerate.  These  are  unconformably  overlain 
by  ferricrete.  The  unconformity  marks  a  significant  hiatus.  Sedimentary  features  in  the 
greywacke  including  cross-bedding,  gradational  bedding,  scour  and  fill  structures,  ripple 
marks,  upward  fining  sequences,  slump  folding  and  mud  drapes  indicate  a  palaeo-
environment  that  was  turbiditic  in  character  (Fischer  and  Schmincke,  1994;  Boggs,  2006). 
Slump  structures  are  interpreted  to  form  as  result  of  gravity  sliding  in  a  shallow  marine 
environment with a slurry of mud that has been deformed within the greywacke (Ravanas and 
Furnes,  1995).  They  are  not  on  a  large  scale  like  melange  deposits  but  are  known  from 
subduction  type  settings,  when  on  shallow  to  steep  marine  slopes  that  allow  for  gravity 
failure  (Ravanas  and  Furnes,  1995).  Chert  layers  are  interlaminated  within  the  greywackes 
and  have  been  altered  to  fuchsitic  chert.  They  commonly  form  rip-up  clasts  within  close 
proximity of the chert bed indicating primary  chert. This is interpreted as possible seasonal 
changes  or  time  periods  where  erosion  and  deposition  were  not  rapid  and  allowed  for  the 
deposition of chert. 
Turbidite  currents  account  for  the  rapid  deposition  of  a  large  volume  of  sediment.  The 
sediment is poorly sorted and has angular to intermediate grain shapes.  It also contains lithic 
fragments  and  igneous-derived  minerals  such  as  clinopyroxene.  Clinopyroxene  is  not  as 
resistant  to  weathering  as  minerals  such  as  quartz  and  plagioclase  and  will  therefore 
decompose rapidly with increasing distance from the source (Albarede, 2003). Its presence in 
the metasedimentary rocks of the field area thus indicates that deposition in the sedimentary 
basin  was proximal  to  the source.  The turbidite is interpreted  as being formed in  a shallow 
marine  or  shelf  environment.  It  is  associated  with  deltaic  systems,  which  are  common 
depositional  environments  in  arc  basins  (Fischer  and  Schmincke,  1994).  The  sedimentary 
features  in  the  greywacke  also  assist  with  the  depositional  environment.  Slump  folding  is 
indicative of deltaic and turbiditic deposition due to its instability caused by swift deposition 
on  a  steep  slope  (Boggs,  2004).  Scour  and  fill  structures  occur  in  deltaic  environments, 
especially delta fronts (Boggs, 2004). The fining upwards sequences, within each deposition 
cycle represents small scale Bouma sequences (Fig. 17) that are indicative of turbidite flows 
(Bouma, 1962). In the study area, Bouma Ta, Tb and Tc are commonly seen in the greywacke 
36

--- Page 38 ---
sequence  with  occasional  mud  drapes  making  up  the  Bouma  Te/f  layer  of  the  sequence.  
Layers A and B often occur together in coarser grained sediments which is the case for the 
greywackes (Boggs, 2004) as shown by Figure 14. 
Figure 14: Classic model of the Bouma Cycle (Shanmugam, 1997). 
Stratigraphically, the entire field area was previously assigned to the metasedimentary rocks 
of the Tarkwa Group (Milesi et al., 1989, 1992; Castaing et al., 2003) which represents the 
erosional  product  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup.  The  correlation  with  the  Tarkwa  Group  was 
based on the single conglomerate unit in the study area and several conglomerate bands near 
the  Essakane  gold  mine  (Milesi  et  al.,  1989,  1991;  Bossiere  et  al.,  1996).  The  Tarkwaian 
conglomerates in the type section in Ghana consist mostly of quartz vein clasts and a minor 
proportion  of  quartzite  pebbles  in  a  dark,  fine-grained,  sandy  matrix.  However,  the 
conglomerate found in the study area have similarities to those described by Tshibubudze et 
al.  (2009)  and  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (2011)  and  host  clasts  of  fuchsitic  chert,  black  chert, 
quartz,  dacite,  granodiorite  and  meta-sediment.  These  clasts  are  set  in  an  immature 
greywacke matrix with lithic fragments, gradational bedding and cross-bedding.  
Further argument for the rocks in the field area not to be considered Tarkwa Group sediments 
is that there is no visible regional unconformity that marks the base of the overlying Tarkwa 
sediments.  A  continuous  stratigraphy  is  seen  throughout  the  entire  OGGB  with  no 
unconformity (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). Also, greywacke was sampled from either side of 
37

--- Page 39 ---
the conglomerate member and proved to  be petrographically  similar. This  indicates there is 
no  distinct  change  in  the  sediment  composition  and  that  the  conglomerate  is  merely 
interbedded within the sequence. The conglomerate is most likely a result of short bursts of 
intense flooding of the river systems that carried a heavy sediment load. As a result, the rivers 
washed out farther into the delta system due to the increased energy. A detailed stratigraphic 
column  (Fig.  15)  has  been  produced  showing  facies  variation  in  the  greywacke  sequence, 
focusing on the change in sedimentary features and composition.  
Lithologies 
True Thickness 
Sand/Alluvium   
Palaeosands 
Ferricrete 
Monzodiorite 
? 
? 
30 m 
Granodiorite-quartz monzodiorite 
Greywacke with sedimentary features 
Greywacke with sedimentary features 
820 m 
Greywacke with planar bedding  
612 m 
Dembam Conglomerate Member 
7 m 
Greywacke with sedimentary features 
1720 m  
Greywacke with   dominant lithic fragments 
643 m 
Figure  15:  Detailed  stratigraphic  column  showing  lithologies  (including  facies 
variation), deformation events and true thicknesses of the units. 
38

--- Page 40 ---
The  stratigraphic  column  is  important  as  it  helps  verify  the  depositional  environment.  The 
column  attempts  to  characterize  the  greywacke  in  terms  of  different  lithofacies.  This  was 
determined by slight facies changes shown by the change in prominent sedimentary features, 
composition  changes  and  abundances  of  lithic  fragments.  The  lower-most  unit  in  the  study 
area  is  dominated  by  lithic-wackes.  The  lithic  fragments  are  mostly  volcaniclastic  in 
character and indicate a period where there was a high rate of erosion and rapid deposition. It 
was  not  influenced  greatly  by  fluid  flow.  This  is  because  there  is  a  lack  of  sedimentary 
structures.  The  next  stratigraphic  unit  contains  sedimentary  features  (cross-bedding,  mud 
drapes, gradational fining upward sequences, truncated beds, ripple marks and scour and fill 
structures) that indicate a shallower facies of the delta. At this point, the effects of waves and 
currents created cross-beds and the above mentioned sedimentary features. Gradational fining 
upwards sequences prevail and are intercalated  with  mud  drapes  not  more than 5 cm  thick. 
This indicates slightly calmer conditions of deposition during the cycle. The planar bedding 
in  the  unit  above  the  conglomerate  lacks  shallow  marine  induced  sedimentary  features  but 
often contain well defined beds that indicate a facies dominated by unidirectional flow. There 
is an overall fining upwards sequence. 
39

--- Page 41 ---
9.0. Tectonic Setting 
Using  the  sedimentary  features,  its  composition  and  the  type  of  sediments  deposited,  a 
probable basin setting can be determined. The sediments were deposited in a retro-arc basin, 
probably a back-arc basin. The basin was situated behind an ancient magmatic arc, which was 
caused  by  subduction.  Such  an  extensional  environment  is  suitable  for  depositing  large 
quantities of sediment in a relatively short time (Ravanas, 1991; Ravanas and Furnes, 1995; 
Carter and Naish, 1998). This is synonymous with the greywacke succession of the study area 
which has an approximate thickness of 4.5 kilometres. Magmatic arcs are tectonically active 
regions with increased amounts of uplift. This results in a higher rate of erosion and therefore 
a  higher  rate  of  sedimentation  (Boggs,  2006).  The  granitic  clasts  within  the  conglomerate 
could  be  sourced  from  the  plutonic  material  feeding  the  magma  chambers,  which  means 
extreme erosion must have occurred to exhume the granites.  Another possibility is that the 
granites  made  up  the  continental  crust  and  erosion  subsequently  took  place  during 
tectonically  and  volcanically  active  periods.  This  scenario  also  provides  a  source  for  the 
andesite, dacite and granodiorite clasts. These volcanic rocks are suggested to be the source 
for  the  greywacke  in  the  field  area  and  for  the  underlying  greywackes,  conglomerates  and 
sandstone as described by Tshibubudze et al. (2009). 
40

--- Page 42 ---
10.0. Discussion 
The  WAC,  namely  the  Birimian  Supergroup,  consists  of  many  island  arc  terranes  that 
underwent terrane accretion (2300-2250 Ma). This occurred during the process of subduction, 
thus  creating  a  felsic  continental  crust  due  to  its  association  with  TTG,  calc-alkaline 
plutonism (Klein and Moura., 2009). Following this, other cratonic blocks  which formed in 
the  same  way,  collided  with  the  accreted  arcs  to  form  orogenic  belts  and  the  closure  of  an 
oceanic basin. The Eburnean Orogeny is an example of this process (Hirdes et al., 1996; Hein 
et al., 2004; Feybesse et al., 2006). The OGGB is one of the island arc terranes, and the east 
Markoye  region  is  most  likely  a  small,  but  proximal  to  the  source,  portion  of  the  back-arc 
basin. 
Vidal  et  al.  (2009)  suggested  that  that  the  greenstone  terranes  of  the  WAC  were  deposited 
first in the stratigraphic succession between 2250-2170 Ma and occurred together with TTG 
plutonism.  The  supracrustal  rocks  of  the  OGGB  that  make  up  part  of  the  Birimian 
Supergroup and overlie basement granite-adamellite (Tshibubudze and Hein, in review), were 
deposited  in  a  back-arc  basin  environment.  This  is  identified  by  the  thick  turbiditic 
greywacke sequences which are typical of arc-basin terranes. These arc terranes precede both 
orogenic  events,  i.e.,  The  Tangaean  Event  and  the  Eburnean  Orogeny.  The  source  of  the 
sediments was an island arc, of an unknown, but proximal distance from the basin. The island 
arc  would  have  been  an  area  of  topographical  highlands.  This  was  caused  by  an  isostatic 
response to the upper plate being pushed up during subduction as the subducting plate moves 
down. Mountains also formed well due to the calc-alkaline plutons that develop causing uplift 
of the upper crust (Davis and Reynolds, 1996; Goudie, 2001). The outpour of andesite lavas 
and  various  calc-alkaline  compositions,  during  periods  of  volcanism  would  have  been 
responsible  for  extending  the  mountain  belt  upwards  by  constantly  adding  more  lava.  It  is 
unknown where the  magmatic arc for the basin  in  question was situated  (Prof Ncube-Hein, 
pers.  comms.)  but  based  on  the  sedimentology  and  volcaniclastics  of  the  OGGB 
(Tshibubudze et al., 2009; Tshibubudze and Hein, in review) an arc terrane can be interpreted 
as the source.   
41

--- Page 43 ---
A similar, modern environment exists in the Wanganui Basin in New Zealand. The Wanganui 
Basin is a shallow marine environment from the Plio-Pleistocene and exhibits a full range of 
sedimentary facies. It is still being in-filled today with sediment from an active volcanic arc 
(Carter and Naish.,  1998). Thick sequences of  greywacke and thin conglomerate beds from 
the Mezozoic are deposited in the 5 km deep basin and overlie basement rocks (Proust et al., 
2005). The basin is interpreted to occupy a back-arc setting today at the convergent margin of 
the  Pacific  and  Australian  plates,  where  rapid  deposition  has  taken  place  due  to  eustatic 
changes  (Carter  and  Naish.,  1998).  The  Wanganui  Basin  is  infilled  with  shales,  sandstones 
and  thick  greywacke  sequences  with  intercalated  conglomerate  beds.  This  is  a  good 
correlation  to  the  sediments  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  and  particularly  the  4  km  thick 
sequence of greywacke in the study area. It is typical for thick sedimentary sequences to be 
deposited  during  the  spreading  of  a  back-arc  environment  like  in  back-arc  environments  in 
Norway  (between  Solund  and  Bremanger)  and  New  Zealand  (Ravanas,  1991;  Ravanas  and 
Furnes, 1995; Carter and Naish., 1998). 
Sediment sourced from the arc settings  was transported in river systems that travelled from 
the uplifted regions, towards the basin. The sediment was then deposited in a deltaic system. 
The  greywackes  were  deposited  in  this  deltaic  system  on  a  steep  submarine  slope  which 
allowed for rapid deposition, gravity sliding and slumping, synonymous with turbiditic flows. 
The erosion rate of the arc is interpreted as getting progressively slower throughout the filling 
of  the  basin.  This  is  shown  by  the  lower  greywacke  unit  in  the  stratigraphic  succession, 
having  a much higher abundance of lithic fragments  and igneous minerals  compared to  the 
overlying units. The Dembam Conglomerate Member and those described by Tshibubudze et 
al.,  (2009)  lower  down  in  the  stratigraphy  may  have  been  deposited  very  rapidly,  possibly 
within 1 day. Perhaps this occurred during times of flood. This negates the idea of the field 
area’s original classification of Tarkwa Group rocks (Milesi et al., 1989, 1992). The Tarkwa 
Group, in the type section in Ghana overlies the Birimian supracrustal rocks unconformably. 
The  Dembam  Conglomerate  Member  is  interbedded  within  greywacke  from  the  Birimian 
Supergroup and does not fit the description for the Tarkwaian Group, post-orogenic molasse 
deposits, as described in Ghana (Milesi et al., 1991; Leube et al., 1990). 
42

--- Page 44 ---
The supracrustal rocks of the Birimian Supergroup in OGGB were subsequently intruded by 
quartz-monzonitic,  monzodioritic  and  granodioritic  dykes  and  sills.  They  were  cross-cut  by 
northeast-trending cleavage and folds. Contact metamorphism to hornblende-hornfels facies 
of  the  country  rock  is  also  associated  with  these  intrusions  and  is  thus  an  early  stage 
metamorphism  because  they  are  folded.  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (in  review)  indicated  that 
calc-alkaline dykes and sills are pre-D1 in age. Both the greywacke and intrusives in the field 
area were  affected by the discreet  folding of F1  and then refolded much  more intensely by 
F2.   
Associated  with  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (D2)  was  the  emplacement  of  large  granitoidal 
plutons throughout the WAC (cf., Hirdes and Davis, 2002; Pawlig et al., 2006; Vidal et al., 
2009;  Lompo,  2009,  2010).  This  resulted  in  regional  metamorphism  to  middle  greenschist 
facies. This metamorphism is ubiquitous across the field area and the OGGB except in places 
where large granitic batholiths such as the Dori Batholith (pre-D1) intruded and metamorphic 
grade  attain  granulite  facies  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009;  Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  2010).  Syn-
D2, N-S extensional faulting occurs throughout the belt. Dilation of the fault is a result of the 
maximum compressive stress in a SE-NW orientation. 
Back-arc  extension  and  crustal  thinning  occurred  in  the  OGGB.  This  allowed  for  mantle 
upwelling  and  the  formation  of  a  spreading  centre.  The  lavas  of  which,  correspond  to  the 
hyaloclastite basaltic pillow lavas described by Tshibubudze et al. (2009) at the base of the 
OGGB.  With  lithospheric  stretching  and  crustal  thinning,  the  mantle  would  be  in  close 
proximity  to  the  lower  crust,  causing  an  increase  in  the  geothermal  gradient.  The  static, 
regional  thermal  gradient  increase  may  have  resulted  in  diastathermal  metamorphism. 
Metamorphism  in  the  OGGB  most-likely  continued  as  long  as  the  back-arc  was  under 
extension and the mantle was closer to the crust. Because the arc-terranes were active before 
the  Eburnean  Orogeny,  it  suggests  that  metamorphism  to  greenschist  facies  in  the  OGGB 
may pre-date the orogenic event. 
Ferricrete exists in the OGGB (Fig. 18) and throughout most of the WAC. It unconformably 
overlies the above geology. It is important stratigraphically as it is easily correlated. There is 
43

--- Page 45 ---
more than a 1.9 Ga hiatus in the sedimentary sequence of the belt. This ferricrete is overlain 
by recent, unconsolidated aeolian sediments and alluvium which make up most of the recent 
stratigraphy of the OGGB. 39Ar-Ar40 age dating of laterite at Tambão, north of the field area, 
suggested  that  the  last  period  of  weathering  and  oxidation  was  between  18  Ma  and  3  Ma 
which was the time the iron-rich laterites formed (Beauvais et al., 2008). This weathering is a 
reworking  of  previously  formed  bauxite  deposits  from  a  tropical  palaeo-climate  that 
dominated  the  region  approximately  60  Ma.  Mechanical  weathering  dominated  the  last  18 
Ma and ultimately produced the glacis that are seen today (Beauvais et al., 2008). The laterite 
and ferricrete form part of the stratigraphy in the field area. It can be correlated across large 
areas as it represents a large gap in the stratigraphy. Palaeoproterozoic rocks are weathered to 
produce  the  iron-rich  laterite  which  suggests  that  any  cover  rocks  overlying  the  Birimian 
were subsequently eroded.  
44

--- Page 46 ---
a 
b 
1 mm 
c 
1 mm 
d 
1 mm 
e 
0.5 mm 
f 
1 mm 
1 mm 
45

--- Page 47 ---
g 
h 
1 mm 
1 mm 
Figure 16: a. KH/LP/022: Deuterically altered, euhedral plagioclase crystal surrounded by a groundmass of quartz, plagioclase and cpx phenocrysts.  b. 
KH/LP/022: Altered, twinned cpx crystal in a groundmass of quartz, plagioclase and cpx c. KH/LP/113: Fine-grained hornfels greywacke-no sedimentary features 
visible d.  KH/LP/147: Randomly oriented hornblende needles e. KH/LP/065a: Granophyric texture within a greywacke f. KH/LP/065 b: Larger, angular-
intermediate quartz and chert grains in a matrix of smaller quartz, plagioclase and chert grains g. KH/LP/65b: chert, quartz, plagioclase and cpx are the most 
abundant minerals in the greywacke samples h. KH/LP/114:  Large quartz and chert grains affected by ferroginisation.  
Figure 8: A bleached hornfels with no internal structure and finely grained. 
a 
b 
Figure 6 a & b: Images showing the lack of in-situ rock and the abundance of loose boulders. 
46

--- Page 48 ---
Layer A-Planar and cross-bedding    
Layer B-Massive and graded 
Figure 17: Layer A and B of a Bouma sequence in the greywackes 
0      1 km 
                                     N                      
   N                                           0     100 m 
Figure  18:    Laterite  capped  ridges  covering  a 
relatively large area of the study region. 
47

--- Page 49 ---
a 
c 
b 
d 
48

--- Page 50 ---
e 
f 
Figure 19: a. Polymict cobble conglomerate bed  (Dembam member) with sub-angular-angular clasts of dacite, granite, metasandstone, green chert, black chert 
and vein quartz  in a  opposite  directions      d.   Flame  structures  indicating  flow  direction  from  left  to  right    e.   Gravity  induced  slumping  within greywacke    f.   
Ripple marks and planar bedding 
a 
b 
c 
Figure 20 a,b & c: Photograph of monzodiorite - quartz monzodiorite showing elongated plagioclase crystals and a groundmass of clinopyroxene.   
49

--- Page 51 ---
11.0. Conclusions 
Field  data  and  interpretation  lead  to  the  establishment  of  a  detailed  lithofacies  stratigraphic 
section for the field  area. The stratigraphy can be divided into five supracrustal lithological 
units; greywacke with an interbed of conglomerate, ferricrete, palaeosands and alluvium. The 
last  two  units  however,  make  up  more  recent  sedimentary  deposits  and  were  not  given  too 
much focus. The greywacke unit can be further sub-divided into three different facies which 
are defined by the sedimentary features, abundance of lithic fragments and composition. It is 
concluded  that  the  rocks  of  that  make  up  this  stratigraphic  section  belong  to  the  Birimian 
Supergroup. This allows for a more regional correlation of the stratigraphy. The depositional 
environment  is  recognised as a deltaic environment,  with  turbiditic  flows within a  back-arc 
basin of an island arc. This is due to the enormous amount of greywacke deposited, which is 
typical of arc basin environments.  
The  overall  metamorphism  is  low-middle  greenschist  facies  which  correlates  with  the 
regional  metamorphic  grade  in  the  WAC.  It  is  a  result  of  large,  syntectonic  TTG,  calc-
alkaline pluton emplacement. However, in the OGGB, it is proposed to be a result of earlier 
diastathermal  metamorphism  caused  by  crustal  thinning  during  back-arc  spreading.  Contact 
metamorphism of the greywacke exists within a close proximity to a series of monzodiorite 
and  granodiorite  dykes  that  intruded  the  supracrustal  rocks  and  the  grade  is  at  hornblende-
hornfels facies. 
The  intrusive  rocks  are  intermediate  and  calc-alkaline  in  composition  and  geochemically 
show  enrichment  in  LREE  relative  to  HREE  and  to  chondrite.  The  monzodiorite  and 
granodiorite dykes intruded before D1, shown by a regional cross-cutting fabric. Structurally, 
gentle folding occurred during D1 with compression in a NW direction occurred, followed by 
a much more intense, NE oriented, deformation event which refolded the rocks. This resulted 
in  a  doubly-folded  sequence  of  asymmetrical,  east-dipping,  east  facing  anticlines  and 
synclines. Late extensional stresses caused the Ludovic Fault System to develop. It is a series 
of  dextral-reverse  normal  faults  which  cross-cut  the  entire  field  area.  Regionally,  these 
structural  events  correlate  with  the  Tangaean  Event  (D1)  and  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  (D2) 
with the latter deforming most of the WAC. 
50

--- Page 52 ---
12.0. References  
Albarede,  F.,  (2003).  Geochemistry:  An  Introduction.  Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, 248 pp. 
Anders,  E.,  and  Grevesse,  N.,  (1989).  Abundances  of  the  elements:  Meteoric  and  solar. 
Geochemica et Cosmochimica Acta, 53, 197-214. 
Barker,  D.  S.,  (1970).  Compositions  of  Granophyre,  Myrmekite,  and  Graphic  Granite. 
The Geological Society of America, 81, 3339-3350. 
Beauvais, A., Ruffet, G., Henocque, O., Colin F., (2008). Chemical and physical erosion 
rhythms  of  the  West  African  Cenozoic  morphogenesis:  The  39Ar-40Ar  dating  of 
supergene K-Mn oxides. Journal of Geophysical Research, 113, 1-15. 
Beziat, D., Dubois, M., Debat, P., Nikiema, S., Salvi, S., Tollon, F., (2008). Gold 
metallogeny  in  the  Birimian  craton  of  Burkina  Faso  (West  Africa).  Journal  of  African 
Earth Sciences, 50, 215–233. 
Boggs, S., (2006). Principles of Sedimentology and stratigraphy: Fourth Edition, Pearson 
Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 662 pp. 
Bossiere,  G.,  Bonkoungou,  I.,  Peucat,  J.  J.,  Pupin,  J.  P.,  (1996).    Origin  and  age  of 
Palaeoproterozoic  conglomerates  and  sandstones  of  the  Tarkwaian  Group  in  Burkina 
Faso, West Africa. Precambrian Research, 80, 153-172. 
Bouma,  A.  H.,  (1962).  Sedimentology  of  some  flysch  deposits:  A  graphic  approach  to 
facies interpretation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 168pp. 
51

--- Page 53 ---
Brown, E. T., Bourles, D. L., Colin, F., Safno, Z., Raisbeck, G. M., Yiou, F., (1994). The 
development of iron crust lateritic systems in Burkina Faso, West Africa examined with 
in-situ-produced cosmogenic nuclides. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 124, 19–33. 
Burke, K., Gunnell, Y., (2008). The African erosion surface: a continental-scale synthesis 
of  geomorphology, tectonics, and environmental change over the past 180 million years. 
Published by Geological Society of America, 34-40. 
Carter,  R.  M.  and  Naish,  T.  R.,  (1998).  A  review  of  Wanganui  Basin,  New  Zealand: 
global 
reference 
section 
for 
shallow  marine,  Plio–Pleistocene 
(2.5–0  Ma) 
cyclostratigraphy. Sedimentary Geology, 122, 37-52. 
Davis,  D.  W.,  Hirdes,  W.,  Schaltegger,  Nunoo,  A.,  (1994).  U–Pb  age  constraints  on 
deposition and provenance of Birimian and gold-bearing Tarkwaian sediments in Ghana, 
West Africa. Precambrian Research, 67, 89–107. 
Davis,  G.  H.,  Reynolds,  S.  J.,  (1996).  Structural  Geology  of  rocks  and  regions:  Second 
edition. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., USA, 776. 
Dott, R. H., (1964). Wacke, Graywacke and matrix-what approach to immature sandstone 
classification? Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 34, 625-632. 
Feybesse,  J.-L.,  Milesi,  J.-P.,  Ouedraogo,  M.F.,  Prost,  A.,  (1990).  La  ‘‘ceinture’’ 
Proterozoıque  inferieur  de  Boromo–Goren  (Burkina  Faso):  un  exemple  d’interference 
entre  deux  phases  transcurrentes  eburneenes.  Comptes  Rendus  de  l’Academie  des 
Sciences de Paris, Serie II, Sciences de la Terre et des Planetes, 310, 1353–1360. 
Feybesse, J. L., Billa, M., Guerrot, C., Duguey, E., Lescuyer, J. L., Milesi, J. P., Bouchot, 
V., 2006. The paleoproterozoic Ghanian province: geodynamic model and ore 
controls, including regional stress modelling. Precambrian Research, 149–196.  
52

--- Page 54 ---
Fischer,  R.  V.,  Schmincke,  H.  U.,  (1994).  Volcaniclastic  sediment  transport  and 
deposition.  In:  Pye,  K.  (Ed.),  Sediment  transport  and  depositional  processes.  Blackwell 
Scientific Publishing, London, 351-388. 
Furnes,  H.,  Ravanas,  R.,  (1995).  The  use  of  geochemical  data  in  determining  the 
provenance and tectonic setting of ancient sedimentary successions:the Kalvag Melange, 
western  Norwegion  Caledonides.  In:  Plint  A.  G.  (Ed.),  Sedimentary  Facies  Analysis:  A 
tribute to the research and teaching of Harold G. Reading. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, 
237-264. 
Goudie, A., (2001). The nature of the environment: 4th Edition. Blackwell Publishers Ltd, 
Oxford, 544 pp. 
Harcöuet,  V.,  Guillou-Frottier,  L.,  Bonneville,  A.,  Bouchot,  V.,  Milesi,  J.  P.,  (2007). 
Geological and thermal conditions before the major Palaeoproterozoic goldmineralization 
event  at  Ashanti,  Ghana,  as  inferred  from  improved  thermal  modelling.  Precambrian 
Research, 154, 71–87. 
Hein, K. A. A., (2003). Relative timing of deformational, metamorphic and 
mineralisation events at the Mt. Todd (Yimuyn Manjerr) Mine, Pine Creek Inlier, 
Northern Territory, Australia. Ore Geology Reviews, 22, 143-175. 
Hein,  K.  A.  A.,  Morel,  V.,  Kagone,  O.,  Kiemde,  F.,  Mayes,  K.,  (2004).  Birimian 
lithological  succession  and  structural  evolution  in  the  Goren  Segment  of  the  Boromo-
Goren Greenstone Belt, Burkina Faso. Journal of African Earth Sciences, 39, 1–23. 
Hein,  K.  A.  A.,  (2010).  Succession  of  structural  events  in  the  Goren  greenstone  belt 
(Burkina  Faso):  Implications  for  West  African  tectonics.  Journal  of  African  Earth 
Sciences, 56, 83-94. 
Hein, K.A.A., Matabane, M.R., in review . The gold-bearing intrusion-related deposits of 
the FE3 opencast gold mines, Sadiola goldfield, Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier, western Mali. 
Ore Geology Reviews. 
53

--- Page 55 ---
Hirdes, W., Davis, D. W., Eisenlohr, B. N., (1992). Reassessment of Proterozoic granitoid 
ages in  Ghana on the basis of U/Pb zircon and  monazite dating. Precambrian Research, 
56, 89-96. 
Hirdes, W., Davis,  D.  W.,  Ludtke, G., Konan,  G., (1996). Two  generations  of Birimian 
(Paleoproterozoic)  volcanic  belts 
in  north-eastern  Cote  d’Ivoire  (West  Africa): 
consequences for the Birimian controversy’. Precambrian Research, 80, 173–191. 
Junner, N.R., (1935). Gold in the gold coast, Ghana Geological Survey Memoir, No. 4, 
67pp. 
Hirdes, W., Davis, D. W., (2002). U-Pd geochronology of Palaeoproterozoic rocks in the 
southern  part  of  the  Kedougou-Kenieba  Inlier,  Senegal,  West  Africa:  Evidence  for 
diachronous accretionary development of the Eburnean province. Precambrian Research, 
118, 83-99. 
Klein, E.L., Moura, C.A.V., (2009). São Luis craton and Gurupi belt (Brazil): possible 
links with the West African craton and surroundings Pan-African belts. In: Pankhurst, 
R.J., Trouw, R.A.J., Britto Neves, B.B., de Wit, M.J. (Eds.), West Gondwana: Pre-
Cenozoic correlations across the South-Atlantic region, Geological Society, London, 
137–151 (Special Publications). 
Le Maitre, R.W., Bateman, P., Dudek, A., Keller, J., Lameyre, J., Le Bas, M. J., Sabine, 
P. A., Schmid, R., Sorensen, H., Streckeisen, A., Woolley, A. R.,  Zanettin, B., (1989). A 
Classification of Igneous Rocks and Glossary of terms: Recommendations of the 
International Union of Geological Sciences Subcommission on the Systematics of 
Igneous Rocks. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, U.K. 236 pp. 
Leube, A., Hirdes, W., Mauer, R., Kesse, G. O., (1990). The early Proterozoic Birimian 
Supergroup of Ghana and some aspects of its associated gold mineralization. Precambrian 
Research, 46, 139–165. 
54

--- Page 56 ---
Lompo, M., (2009). Geodynamic evolution of the 2.5-2.0 Ga Palaeoproterozoic magmatic 
rocks in  the  Leo-Man Shield of the West  African Craton.  A model of subsidence of an 
oceanic plateau. In: Reddy, S. M., Mazumder, R., Evans, D. A. D., Collins, A. S. (Eds.), 
Palaeoproterozoic and global evolution. Geological Society, London, Special Publication 
323, 231-254. 
Lompo, M., (2010). Palaeoproterozoic structural evolution of the Man-Leo Shield (West 
Africa). Key structures for vertical to transcurrent tectonics. Journal of African Earth 
Sciences, 58, 19–36. 
Milesi, J. P., Feybesse, J. L., Ledru, P., Dommanget, A., Ouedraogo, M. F., Marcoux, E., 
Prost, A., Vinchon, Ch., Sylvain, J. P., Johan, V., Tegyey, M., Calvez, J. Y., Lagny, P., 
(1989).  West  African  gold  deposits,  in  their  lower  Proterozoic  lithostructural  setting. 
Chronique de la Recherche Miniere, 497, 3–98. 
Milesi,  J.P.,  Ledru,  P.,  Ankrah,  P.,  Johan,  V.,  Marcoux,  E.,  Vinchon,  C.,  (1991).  The 
metallogenic  relationship  between  Birimian  and  Tarkwaian  gold  deposits  in  Ghana. 
Mineralium Deposita, 26, 228–238. 
Milesi,  J.P.,  Ledru,  P.,  Feybesse,  J.L.,  Dommanget,  A.,  Marcoux,  E.,  (1992).  Early 
Proterozoic  ore  deposits  and  tectonics  of  the  Birimian  orogenic  belt,  West  Africa. 
Precambrian Research, 58, 305–344. 
Needham, R. S., Stuart-Smith, P. G., Page, R. W., (1988). Tectonic evolution of the Pine 
Creek Inlier, Nothern Territory. Precambrian Research, 40/41, 543-564. 
Nesse,  W.  D.,  (2000).  Introduction  to  mineralogy.  Oxford  University  Press,  Oxford,  pg 
92, 442 pp. 
Neuerburg,  G.  J.,  (1958).  Deuteric  alteration  of  some  aplite-pegmatities  of  the  Boulder 
Batholith,  Montana,  and  its  possible  significance  to  ore  deposition.  Economic  Geology, 
53, 287-299. 
55

--- Page 57 ---
Pawlig, S., Gueye, M., Klischies, R., Schwarz, S., Wemmer, K., Siegesmund, S., (2006). 
Geochemical and Sr–Nd isotopic data on the Birimian of the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier 
(Eastern Senegal): implications on the Palaeoproterozoic evolution of the West African 
Craton. South African Journal of Geology, 109, 411–427. 
Proust, J. N., Lamarche, G., Nodder, S., Kamp, P. J. J., (2005). Sedimentary architecture 
of a Plio-Pleistocene proto-back-arc basin: Wanganui Basin, New Zealand. Sedimentary 
Geology, 181, 107-145. 
Ravanas,  R.,  (1991).  A  sedimentological,  geochemical  and  provenance  study  of  the 
Kalvag  Melange,  western  Norwegian  Caledonides,  Thesis  (unpublished).  University  of 
Bergen, 212 pp. 
Shanmugam,  G., (1997). The  Bouma sequence and the turbidite mindset.  Earth Science 
Reviews, 42, 201-229. 
Streckeisen,  A.  L.,  (1976).  To  each  plutonic  rock  its  proper  name.  Earth-Science 
Reviews, 12, 1-33. 
Tshibubudze, A., Hein,  K. A. A., Marquis, P.,  (2009). The Markoye Shear  Zone in  NE 
Burkina Faso. Journal of African Earth Sciences, 55, 245–256. 
Tshibubudze,  A.,  Hein,  K.A.A.,  in  review.  Structural  setting  of  gold  deposits  in  the 
Oudalan-Gourouol greenstone belt east of the Markoye Shear Zone, West African craton. 
Precambrian Research. 
Vidal, M., Gumaix, C., Cagnard, F., Pouclet, A., Ouattara, G., Pichon, M., (2009). 
56

--- Page 58 ---
Evolution of a Paleoproterozoic ‘‘weak type” orogeny in the West African Craton (Ivory 
Coast). Tectonophysics, 477, 145–159. 
Vernon, R. H., Clarke, G. L., (2008). Principles of metamorphic geology. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 446. 
57
