
--- Page 4 ---
Abstract  
The  Pissila  batholith  is  a  foliated  coarse-grained  granodiorite,  which  is  located  in  north 
eastern Burkina Faso. The batholith was emplaced at 2143 ±12 Ma and 2117 ±17Ma, coeval 
with  the  Eburnean  orogeny.  The  Eburnean  orogeny  represents  a  period  of  major  crustal 
growth in an island arc setting. The batholith is geochemically similar to other calc-alkaline 
granitoids in the domain. The Saaba zone gneiss, which is locally migmatitic is located within 
the  Pissila  batholith.  Geochemically,  the  gneiss  and  migmatites  have  some  Archean  TTG 
affiliations.  Granitoids  that  are  associated  with  gneisses  and  migmatites  were  previously 
described in north eastern Burkina Faso, Côte d’lvoire and Senegal. These studies concluded 
that the granitoids intruded into the pre-existing gneissic terrane. This study suggests that the 
Saaba  zone  and  Pissila  batholith  are  geochemically  and  petrological  different  from  each 
other. The Saaba zone gneiss does not  represent  a deformed region  of the Pissila batholith. 
Based on similarities of the study area to other granitoid-gneissic terrane, the Saaba zone may 
predate the Pissila batholith. It is also proposed that the gneiss preserve an older deformation 
event  D1,  which  lead  to  amphibolite  facies  metamorphism.  The  second  deformation  D2 
affected  both  granodiorite  and  gneiss.  D2  lead  to  greenschist  facies  metamorphism  of  the 
rocks.  
4

--- Page 5 ---
1. 
Introduction 
The Bauolé-Mossi domain consists of predominately Palaeoproterozoic calc-alkaline and 
alkaline granitoid intrusions. Theses rocks were emplaced between ca 2.1 to 1.8 Ga (Vega et 
al.,  2008).  The  presence  of  terranes  that  predates  and  may  act  as  basement  rocks  to  the 
Birimian granitoids has been the subject of debate. Basement rocks are typically gneissic to 
migmatitic,  thus  the  granitoid-gneissic  terranes  in  the  West  African  Craton  became  the 
subject of a number of studies (Eisenhohr and Hirdes, 1992, Pons et al., 1995, Hirdes et al., 
1996,  Gasquet  et  al.,  2003).  Lemoine,  1988  in  Gasquet  et  al.,  2003  introduced  the  term 
Burkinian,  which  corresponds  to  reworking  of  Archean  rocks  and  formed  the  gneissic 
terrance  in  Côte  d’lvoire.  Hirdes  et  al.,  1996  proposed  the  gneissic  terrane  in  the  Dabakala 
predate 2.1 Ga batholith intrusions. This was rejected by Gasquet et al., 2003 who concluded 
the gneiss were syntectonic despite zircons recovered at 2.3 Ga. 
5

--- Page 6 ---
2. 
Regional Geology 
The West African Craton consists of several shields. The Archean-Palaeoproterozoic Leo-
Man  rise  in  the  south  and  the  Reguibat  rise  in  the  north,  which  are  separated  by  the 
Phanerozoic Toudeni basin. The Leo-Man rise consists of the Archean Kénéma-Man domain 
and the Palaeoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain (Fig 2.1) (Cahen et al., 1984). 
Fig 2.1. The West African Craton consists of the Archean and Palaeoproterozoic Reguibat in the north 
and the Leo-Man in the south (Béziat et al., 2008). 
2.1. Archean domain 
The Archean domain is divided into three units - 
I.  The basement rocks are grey-banded migmatitic orthogneiss, which formed ca. 3.5 to 
3.4  Ga  (Potrel  et  al.,  1998).  The  gneisses  are  trondhjemitic  in  composition 
(Kouamelan et al., 1997). They were subsequently metamorphosed to granulite facies 
(Potrel et al., 1998; Thieblemont et al., 2004).  
II.  The gneisses were then intruded by granitic batholiths ca. 2.7 Ga (Thieblemont et al., 
2004).  The  intrusions  occur  as  granites  (sensu  stricto),  crosscutting  the  basement 
gneiss (Kouamelan et al., 1997). 
III.  The basement rocks are overlain by metavolcanic and metasedimentary rocks  of the 
Loko Formation (Feybesse and Milési, 1994).  
6

--- Page 7 ---
The Kénéma-Man domain  was deformed and  metamorphosed during two major tectonic 
events. The Leonean cycle, ca 3.0 Ga is associated with north-south trending structures and 
metamorphism of basement rocks to granulite- facies (Cahen et al., 1984; Thieblemont et al., 
2004).  The  Liberian  event,  ca  2.7  Ga  resulted  in  N-S  to  NNE-SSW  trending  structures 
(Thieblemont  et  al.,  2004).  The  Liberian  event  culminated  with  TTG  batholith  intrusions 
(Skinner et al., 2004).  
2.2. Palaeoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain 
The  Birimian  was  first  described  by  Kitsh  from  outcrops  in  the  Birim  River  Valley  in 
southern  Ghana  (Pohl,  1998).  The  lithostratigraphic  sequence  became  the  subject  of 
controversy,  where  two  schools  of  thought  emerged;  the  Anglophone  and  Francophone. 
Junner (from the Anglophone school) sub-divided the Birimian into the Lower and the Upper 
Birimian (Hirdes et al., 1996). 
I.  The Lower Birimian is predominately composed of metasedimentary rocks, including 
argillites, shale and conglomerates (Roddaz et al., 2007). The metasedimentary rocks 
are  intercalated  with  dacite  and  rhyolite  metavolcanic  rocks  (Tshibubudze  et  al., 
2009).  
II.  The  Upper  Birimian  consists  of  tholeiitic  lavas,  which  are  locally  pillowed, 
intercalated with  turbidites and  meta-volcanoclastic sedimentary  rocks  (Debat  et  al., 
2003).  
The Tarkwaian  unconformably overlies the Upper Birimian  and  consist  of coarse  clastic 
sedimentary  unit  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  The  description  of  the  unit  is  based  on  work 
done in Ghana (Eisenlohr and Hirdes, 1992).  
I.  The Tarkwaian includes basal conglomerates from the Kewese Group (Pohl, 1998). 
II. 
Shales, quartzite and meta-conglomerates of the Banket Group. 
III.  Overlying the Banket Group are shales and phyllites of the Tarkwa formation (Cahen 
et al., 1984; Tshibubudze et al., 2009). 
The above Anglophone Birimian sequence was inverted by the Francophone school. The 
predominately  volcanic  units  were  interpreted  as  being  younger  than  the  metasedimentary 
units (Milési et al., 1992).However, during a study of the Goren-greenstone belt in Burkina 
7

--- Page 8 ---
Faso, Hein et al., (2004) concluded that sub-dividing the Birimian into two units did not fit 
the conformable nature of the sequence. Instead, they found three intercalated meta-volcanic 
and  meta-volcanic  sequences  (Tshibubudze  et  al.,  2009).  According  to  Tagini,  (1971)  in 
Hastings,  (1982),  the  Birimian  was  deposited  in  an  intra-continental  rift  basin,  followed  by 
sedimentation  and  localized  volcanism.  The  Birimian  and  the  Tarkwaian  are  considered  to 
represent  transition  from  a  deep  marine  to  sub-aerial  depositional  environment  caused  by 
uplift during craton accretion (Pohl, 1998).   
2.3. Magmatic Intrusions  
Granitoids  cover  approximately  70%  of  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  (Debat  et  al.,  2003). 
The granitoids intruded into meta-volcanic and meta-sedimentary rocks during the Eburnean 
orogeny  (Egal  et  al.,  2002).  The  Eburnean  orogeny  marks  a  major  period  of  crustal 
thickening 2.1 to 2.0 Ga (Pons et al., 1995). 
The  granitoids  are  calc-alkaline  and  locally  alkaline  in  composition  with  minor  crustal 
component  (Gasquet  et  al.,  2003).  The  granitoids  are  divided  into  three  groups,  unfoliated 
hornblende-bearing,  foliated  biotite-bearing  and  alkaline  granitoids  (Dioh  et  al.,  2006). 
Gasquet et al., (2003), Naba et al., (2004) and Agbossoumonde et al., (2007) observed that 
the granitoids grade into gneissic and migmatitic structures.  
2.4. Regional tectonics 
The Eburnean orogeny represents accretion of the Archean Kénéma-Man domain with the 
Palaeoproterozoic  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  (Feybesse  et  al.,  2006).  The  orogeny 
is 
characterised  by  three  deformation  events,  D1  and  D2-D3  (Baratoux  et  al.,  2011).  The 
deformation  of  the  meta-volcano-sedimentary  sequence  was  coeval  to  TTG  granitoid  and 
granite intrusions (Hein et al., 2004).  
According  to  Hirdes  et  al.,  (1996)  D1  deformation  occurred  between  2112  Ma  to  2100 
Ma.  D1  magmatic  event  lead  to  metamorphism  of  the  volcano-sedimentary  sequence  to 
greenschist and locally amphibolite facies (Baratoux et al., 2011). D1 is also associated with 
the development of NW-trending folds (Hein et al., 2004). 
D2-3  represents  a  period  of  crustal  thickening,  which  lead  to  NE-trending  veins  and 
brecciation (Tshibubudze et al., 2009). Uplift and further shortening of the crust is associated 
with  the  development  of  brittle  shears  and  NE-trending  folds  (Feybesse  et  al.,  2006). 
8

--- Page 9 ---
Emplacement of the granitoids was parallel to NE-trending fold axial planes (Baratoux et al., 
2011).  
9

--- Page 10 ---
3. 
Aim 
Fig  3.1.  Map  illustrates  the  location  of  the  study  area.  The  white  numbers  corresponds  to  sample 
numbers and the locations were each sample was collected.  
The Pissila batholith and the Saaba zone gneiss are located near the town of Pissila in NE 
Burkina  Faso.  The  aim  of  the  project  is  to  determine  the  relationship  between  the  Pissila 
batholith and the Saaba zone gneiss. The gneiss could represent a highly metamorphosed and 
deformed  part  of  the  batholith.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gneiss  maybe  a  partially  exposed 
gneissic terrane that has little to no affiliations to the batholith. The contact between the two 
could not be established during fieldwork due to lack of outcrops.  
The relationship between the Pissila batholith and the Saaba zone gneiss is determined by; 
I. 
Providing a petrographic and geochemical description of the batholith and the gneiss. 
II.  Comparison of the petrographic and geochemical data obtained for the two areas. 
III.  Comparison batholith and the gneiss with other granitoids in Burkina Faso and similar 
granitoids in the West African Craton. 
10

--- Page 11 ---
4. 
Methodology 
Field work 
Samples from the Pissila batholith and the Saaba Zone gneiss were collected during field 
work  in  January  2012.  Mapping  of  the  study  area  and  sample  collection  was  conducted  by 
Profs.  Kerstin  Saalmann  and  Kim  Ncube-Hein.  The  locations  of  each  station  point  were 
recorded  using  GPS  co-ordinates.  The  World  Geodetic  System  (WGS  84)  and  Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) in meters were used as the datum and format, respectively. The 
location map of the study area was created using Expert GPS 4.57. The data from Expert GPS 
was exported to Google Earth.  
Petrography  
Seven  polished  thin  sections  were  used  for  petrography.  Reflected  light  was  used  to 
examine  the  oxide  mineralization.  Five  of  the  seven  thin  sections  were  used  for  point 
counting.  An  average  of  500  minerals  in  each  samples  were  counted  using  Petrog  JVC 
V2.42.15.  The  data  obtained  from  point  counting  was  used  for  sample  classification  and 
comparison. 
Thin sections were photographed under transmitted light. The coarse nature of some of the 
samples did not allow for the foliation to be photographed. Thin sections were subsequently 
scanned to illustrate the foliation. 
Geochemistry 
Five samples were submitted for geochemical analysis. The bulk composition of the rocks 
was obtained using Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (WDXRF) and 
Inductively  coupled  plasma  emission  mass  spectrometry  (ICP-MS).  Samples  were  crushed 
and finely milled for both methods. 
Major elements were analyzed using WDXRF from fused disks. The milled samples were 
mixed with  a pre-ignition  flux and heated to  1,020°C for 50 minutes. H2O- and  H2O+ were 
then calculated. The mixture was mechanically pressed into a fussed disked and analyzed.  
Samples  for  ICP-MS  were  prepared  by  mixing  the  milled  powder  with  HNO3/HF  and 
heated to 235°C. The liquid  was evaporated on a hot plate that was heated to 70°C. 2ml of 
11

--- Page 12 ---
HNO3  was  added  to  the  liquid  and  heated  to  60°C  and  evaporated.  The  evaporated  sample 
was then ready for ICP-MS. 
12

--- Page 13 ---
5. 
Petrography  
5.1. Granodiorite 
Granitoid  sample,  KS-2012-14  and  KS-2012-15  are  coarse-grained  granodioritic  rocks. 
Both samples were used for hand-sample description, but only KS-2012-15 was used for thin-
section description. In hand specimen, the rocks  have a dark greenish  colour. The colour is 
due to the abundant hornblende and biotite. Sample KS-2012-15 contains hornblende (16%), 
biotite (9%), plagioclase (24%), quartz (35%) and microcline (15%). Accessory minerals are 
Fe-Ti oxide, chlorite and epidote (>1%) (Table 1). The granitoid, based on modal abundance, 
is classified as granodiorite (Appendix E).  
Hornblende in sample KS-2012-15 is anhedral and zoned. The minerals exhibit a graphic 
texture between hornblende, quartz and Fe-Ti oxide (Fig 5.1.1 A). Hornblende has twinning 
lamellae that is oblique to cleavage (Fig 5.1.1B).  
Primary  and  secondary  biotite  was  found  in  the  sample.  Secondary  biotite  occurs  in 
replacement  of  hornblende.  The  minerals  are  fine-grained  and  exhibits  serrated  grain-
boundaries.  Primary  biotite  exhibit  lobate  grain-boundaries.  It  also  exhibit  folded  cleavage, 
undulose extinction and fractures (Fig 5.1.1C). 
Plagioclase, microcline and quartz are weakly foliated. Plagioclase crystals are subhedral, 
anhedral  and  very  coarse.  Microcline  is  associated  with  lobate  myrmekite.  Myrmekite  was 
found on the shortening axis of microcline. Quartz exhibits strain induced deformation bands 
(Fig 5.1.1 D). 
 The foliation in the granodiorite is defined by a weak alignment of hornblende, biotite and 
quartz-feldspathic minerals. Quartz and microcline exhibit an alignment that is sub-parallel to 
the mafic minerals. Myrmekite between quartz and microcline was found on the shortening 
axis  of  microcline.  Plagioclase  exhibits  preferred  orientation  in  two  directions,  parallel  and 
oblique to the mafic minerals. 
13

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 5.1.1. (A) Primary intergrowth between hornblende, quartz, plagioclase and Fe-Ti oxide. (B) 
Hornblende with twinning lamellae  that is oblique to cleavage. Cleavage direction is indicated with 
yellow  lines.  (C)  Illustrates  biotite  with folded  cleavage  and  undulose  extinction.  (D)  Quartz  in  the 
centre exhibit deformation bands. 
5.2. Biotite gneiss 
The Saaba Zone is characterised by medium-grain biotite gneiss. Hand samples KS-2012- 
17B and 17C are foliated. Biotite, hornblende and discontinuous feldspathic layers (0.5-3mm 
thick)  define  the  fabric.  Sample  KS-2012-17B  is  predominately  composed  of  quartz  (66%) 
with  plagioclase  (18%),  microcline  (8%),  hornblende  (3%),  biotite  (5%)  and  Fe-Ti  oxide 
(>1%) (Table 1).  
Hornblende and biotite are elongated and strongly aligned. The minerals form parallel and 
anastomosing  foliations.  The  minerals  are  associated  with  Fe-Ti  oxide.  Oxides  are  cubic, 
which indicates primary mineralization. Oxides are also found over-printing biotite. 
Quartz, plagioclase and microcline are elongated. The minerals are aligned sub-parallel to 
biotite.  Low  temperature  structures  that  include  pressure  solution  and  sweeping  undulose 
extinction are prevalent in quartz. However, minor amount of chessboard quartz was found in 
the samples (Fig 5.2.1A). Plagioclase and microcline are dominated by grain-size reduction 
and sub-grain rotation (Fig 5.2.1B).   
14

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 5.2.1 (A) The image illustrates the formation of sub-grains and subsequent rotation of the sub-
grains. The  image  also  shows  pressure  solution. (B) Chessboard sub-grains  in the  samples  occur  in 
minor amounts. 
5.3. Migmatites  
Migmatites  are  a  mixture  of  two  or  more  petrographically  distinct  parts  (Sawyer,  2008). 
They  form  by  partial  melting  of  a  source  rock.  The  melt  forms  light-coloured  veins 
(leucosome)  and  mafic-rich  melanosomes.  The  Saaba  Zone  gneiss  is  locally  migmatitic. 
Foliation and small-scale folds are visible in hand samples. In hand sample, the leucosomes 
are  composed  of  discontinuous  quartz  and  feldspar-rich  melts.  The  melanosomes  are 
predominantly composed of biotite and hornblende. 
The folds in Sample KS-2012-23 consist of predominantly biotite with minor hornblende 
and  Fe-Ti  oxide.  Biotite  is  cross-cut  by  acicular  rutile.  Rutile  suggests  late  Ti-rich 
hydrothermal fluid circulation. Fe-Ti oxide is also associated with biotite.  
Plagioclase and microcline were found with pervasive sericitic alteration (Fig 5.3.1 A, B). 
Microcline and plagioclase twining lamellae were not visible due to pervasive alteration. In 
plane polarized light quartz exhibit “cloudy” texture as a result of numerous fluid inclusions.  
The migmatites are cross-cut by K-feldspar rich veins. In hand sample, the veins exhibit a 
grainy-texture.  The  vein  is  predominantly  composed  of  quartz,  minor  microcline  and  less 
than  1%  plagioclase.  Biotite  was  found  interstitial  to  quartz  and  microcline  or  found  as 
clusters. 
15

--- Page 17 ---
Fig.  5.4.1.  Foliated  coarse-grained  granodiorite.  The  rock  consists  of  hornblende,  biotite, 
plagioclase, microcline, quartz, epidote, chlorite and Fe-Ti oxide.  
Fig 5.4.2. Gneiss exhibits folded leucocratic veins in hand sample. The leucocratic veins consists 
of coarse-grained quartz, plagioclase and microcline.  
17

--- Page 18 ---
Fig 5.4.3. The image illustrates migmatite with leucosome. The leucosome consists of biotte and 
hornblende cluster that give the vein a spotted texture. 
18

--- Page 19 ---
6.  Geochemistry 
Geochemistry is one of the fundamental steps in understanding magmatic rocks. It allows 
for understanding of the source material, processes that form and influence the evolution of 
the rocks. The chemical signature of metamorphic rocks is predominately influenced by the 
composition of the parent rock. It is possible that the composition of the metamorphic rock is 
derived from a mixture of two sources.  
In this section the aim is to compare and contrast the geochemical data of the granodiorite, 
K-rich vein and gneiss/migmatites. The geochemical data is divided into two groups, major 
and trace elements. A comparison on the samples collect with those in the Birimian follows 
in the discussion. 
6.1 Major elements 
The  granodiorite  exhibit  a  slightly  acidic  composition  (SiO2  =  64.83  wt  %).  The  gneiss 
and migmatites exhibit higher silicate oxide content, which ranges from 74.01 to 75.61wt %. 
The  granodiorite  was  classified  as  a  quartz-monzodiorite/  monozogabbro.  Gneiss  and 
migmatites were classified as granodiorite and trondhjemite, respectively. This classification 
is based on CIPW norm mineral calculations (Fig 6.1.1). On the other hand, the samples have 
a different classification when using the sample’s alkali and silicate content (Fig 6.1.2). 
Granodiorite  is  more  mafic  rich  compared  to  the  other  samples.  The  iron  content  in 
granodiorite is almost twice that of gneiss and the K-rich vein. In general the granodiorite has 
the highest oxide content (Table 2). 
The K-rich vein, in contrast to the granodiorite exhibit low oxide percentage in all major 
elements. However, the SiO2 and K2O content are highest in the vein. Gneiss and migmatites 
generally exhibit composition that plots in between the granodiorite and K-rich vein. 
The samples are medium to high K calc-alkaline, except one migmatite sample that has a 
low  K  tholeiitic  composition.  Na2O/K2O  ratio  in  gneiss  and  migmatites  range  from  2.09  to 
4.52.  Granodiorite  and  K-rich  Na2O/K2O  ratios  are  1.32  and  0.87,  respectively.  K2O/Na2O 
ratios in all samples are less than 0.5, with exception to granodiorite and K-rich vein. 
19

--- Page 22 ---
Fig. 6.1.1. Plutonic rock classification diagram based on CIPW norm minerals 
22

--- Page 23 ---
Fig 6.1.2. The alkali verse silicate oxide diagram illustrates that sample KS-2012-15 is granodioritic 
in  composition.  The  gneiss  and  migmatites  have  a  granitic  composition  and  the  K-rich  vein  is  an 
alkali granite. (Maroon= granodiorite, yellow and orange= biotite-  gneiss, green=K-rich vein, blue= 
migmatite). 
Fig. 6.1.3. The diagram illustrates that samples are medium- to high K calc-alkaline series, except one 
migmatite sample that is low K tholeiite. (Maroon= granodiorite, yellow and orange= biotite- gneiss, 
green=K-rich vein, blue= migmatite). 
23

--- Page 24 ---
Fig.6.1.4.  K-rich  vein  exhibit  high  K2O  and  high  Si2O  content.  Gneiss  and  migmatites  K2O  ranges 
from  1.11  to  4.85wt  %.  (Maroon=  granodiorite,  yellow  and  orange=  biotite-  gneiss,  green=K-rich 
vein, blue= migmatite). 
Fig. 6.1.5. Gneiss and migmatites exhibit composition that lies between granodiorite and K-rich vein. 
(Maroon= granodiorite, yellow and orange= biotite- gneiss, green=K-rich vein, blue= migmatite). 
24

--- Page 25 ---
Fig. 6.1.6. Granodiorite exhibit relatively high CaO content relative to the other samples that exhibit 
low  CaO.  (Maroon=  granodiorite,  yellow  and  orange=  biotite-  gneiss,  green=K-rich  vein,  blue= 
migmatite). 
Fig. 6.1.7. Gneiss and migmatites exhibit composition that lies between granodiorite and K-rich vein. 
(Maroon= granodiorite, yellow and orange= biotite- gneiss, green=K-rich vein, blue= migmatite). 
25

--- Page 26 ---
6.2. Trace Elements 
The  granodiorite  exhibit  a  depleted  rare  earth  element  pattern  (REE)  relative  to  the 
gneisses and K-rich vein. The granodiorite is depleted in heavy rare earth elements (HREE) 
and  enriched  in  light  rare  earth  elements  (LREE)  (Fig  6.2.1.).  The  samples  exhibit  no  Eu 
anomaly and exhibit a negative Ce anomaly. The granodiorite also exhibit a slight negative 
Tm anomaly. Large ion lithophile elements (LILE) are enriched relative to high field strength 
elements (HFSE) (Fig 6.2.3.). Granodiorite spider plot differs from gneisses, migmatite and 
K-rich vein (Fig 6.2.2). The granodiorite does not exhibit negative Sr and P anomaly, which 
are found in the other samples. 
The gneisses, similar to the granodiorite are enriched in LREE and depleted in HREE (Fig 
6.2.1).  The  gneisses  REE  pattern  is  enriched  relative  to  the  granodiorite,  migmatite  and  K-
rich vein.  The samples  exhibit  a negative Eu anomaly. The samples have concave up ends, 
which  are  similar  to  granitoid  in  the  region.  The  samples  are  enriched  in  LILE  relative  to 
HFSE  (Fig  6.2.3).  The  spider  plot  exhibit  similarities  with  the  samples  from  the  Dabakala 
region in Côte d’lvoire that were described by Gasquet et al., 2003 (Fig 6.2.2 and appendix 
1). The gneisses in the spider plot exhibit a prominent negative Ti and P anomaly.  
The migmatite exhibit a REE pattern that is relatively flat (Fig 6.2.1). The sample’s REE 
pattern is depleted relative to the granodiorite, gneisses and K-rich vein. The flat REE pattern 
suggests that the migmatite’s source rock lacked garnet. The presence of garnet in the source 
would  have  produced  a  depleted  HREE  pattern  relative  to  LREE.  Similar  to  gneisses  the 
sample exhibits a negative Eu anomaly.  The migmatite exhibits a positive Ce anomaly and a 
negative  Eu  anomaly.  Similar  to  the  above  samples,  the  migmatite  is  enriched  in  LILE 
relative to HFSE. 
The K-rich vein is depleted in LREE relative to HREE (Fig 6.2.1). The sample exhibits a 
negative Eu anomaly and a slight negative Ce anomaly. The HREE end is concave up.  The 
sample exhibits an enrichment in LILE relative to HFSE (Fig 6.2.3). The K-rich vein’s spider 
plot  matches  that  of  gneiss,  except  the  K-rich  vein’s  negative  anomalies  are  more 
pronounced. 
26

--- Page 27 ---
Fig. 6.2.1. REE plot of the gneiss and K-rich vein are comparable. The granodiorite and migmatites 
exhibit REE pattern that differ from the gneiss. This may indicate the samples are not related to each 
other.Normalising  values from Evensen et al., 1978 
27

--- Page 28 ---
Fig 6.2.2. The spider diagram illustrates similar patterns between gneisses, migmatites and K-rich 
vein. The gneiss and granodiorite exhibit different anomalies, which may indicate that the samples 
were not derived from the same source. Normalising values from Thompson (1982) and from Sun 
(1980) for Rb, K, P, U, Cs. 
Fig. 6.2.3. Samples exhibit an enrichment in LILE relative to HFSE. This is generally associated with 
metasomatisation of the source rock (Rollinson, 1993). Normalising values from Pearce et al., (1984) 
in Rollinson, 1993. 
28

--- Page 29 ---
7. 
Discussion 
7.1.  Comparison between the gneiss and granodiorite 
The  Pissila  batholith  and  the  Saaba  zone  gneiss  are  petrologically  and  geochemically 
different from each other. The granodiorite exhibit a composition that is more mafic relative 
to the gneiss and migmatite. This is apparent in the thin section where hornblende and biotite 
are  dominant  in  the  granodiorite  relative  to  the  gneiss  and  migmatite.  In  general,  the 
granodiorite  exhibit  higher  oxide  content  relative  to  the  gneiss  and  migmatite,  with  an 
exception to SiO2 and K2O.  
The K-rich vein exhibit a similar REE slope and pattern to the gneiss. This may indicate 
that the K-rich vein was derived from a source comparable to the gneiss. Granodiorite exhibit 
a steep REE slope, whereas gneiss, migmatite and K-rich vein exhibit a flat slope. The gneiss 
and  K-rich  vein  are  enriched  in  REE  relative  to  the  granodiorite.  On  the  other  hand, 
migmatite is depleted in REE relative to the other samples. 
The  spider  diagram  exhibit  variations  between  the  gneiss  and  granodiorite.  Granodiorite 
exhibit a positive Sr anomaly, while other samples exhibit a prominent negative Sr anomaly. 
The  gneiss,  migmatite  and  K-rich  vein  also  exhibit  negative  Ti,  P  and  Ba  anomalies.  The 
granodiorite exhibits either a weak negative or no Ti, P, Ba anomalies. 
The samples exhibit some geochemical similarities. All samples exhibit an enrichment of 
LILE  relative  to  HFSE.  This  may  indicate  metasomitization  of  the  source  rock  (Rollinson, 
1993).  The  samples  are  depleted  in  HREE  relative  to  LREE,  which  indicates  a  garnet  and 
amphibolite-bearing  source  rock  or  residuum  (Holland  &  Turekian,  2003).  Migmatites 
exhibits a flat REE slope, which may suggests that garnet and amphiboles had a minor role 
melt production. 
7.2.  Gneiss and migmatite 
The migmatites exhibit some similarities to Archean TTG. The samples exhibit SiO2> 70 
wt%,  Na2O/K2O>0.5,  K2O/Na2O<0.5,  which  is  characteristic  of  Archean  TTG  (Clarke, 
1992). Thus the gneiss and migmatite may have formed from processes similar to those that 
form  Archean  TTG.  In  contrast  to  the  TTG  described  by  Smithes,  (2000),  the  Saaba  zone 
gneiss and migmatites do not exhibit low Al2O3, Sr and Ba less than 500ppm. 
29

--- Page 30 ---
Archean TTG are thought to have formed by partial melting of a hydrated oceanic crust or 
partial  melting of a thickened crust, leaving  a  garnet-bearing  amphibolite residuum (Martin 
and Moyen, 2002). The latter is not favoured to produce Archean TTG (Martin et al., 2005). 
The TTG are thought to represent felsic melt that interacted with  the mantle during diapiric 
ascent (Clarke, 1992). Partial melting of the lower thickened crust could not have allowed the 
melt to interact with the mantle prior to emplacement (Smithes, 2000).  
According to Doumbia et al., 1998, the concave up HREE end is typical of Archean TTG 
and  of  calc-alkaline  granitoids  in  the  region.  Depletion  of  HREE  relative  to  LREE  is 
controlled by garnet and amphiboles retained in the residuum (Rollinson, 1993). The negative 
Eu and Sr anomalies suggest that plagioclase was retained in the residuum or plagioclase was 
removed from the melt during magma differentiation (Holland & Turekian, 2003).  
The  spider  diagram 
is  enriched 
in  LILE  relative 
to  HFSE,  which  suggests 
metasomitisation  of  the  source  rock  (White,2012).  The  negative  Ti,  Ta,  Nb  anomalies  are 
associated  with  Ti-bearing  mineral  phases  in  the  residuum  (Rollinson,  1993).  The  Ta-Nb 
anomalies  in  gneiss,  migmatites  and  the  K-rich  vein  are  considered  to  be  an  indicator  of 
crustal contamination (Holland & Turekian, 2003).  
7.3.  Granodiorite 
The  granodiorite  was  probably  derived  from  partial  melting  of  a  metasomitized  garnet-
bearing  amphibole  with  a  crustal  component.  Emplacement  of  the  granitoid  was  between 
2143±12  and  21117±17  Ma  in  an  island  are  setting.  The  granitoid  was  later  deformed  and 
metamorphosed to greenschist facies during the Eburnean orogeny (Tshibubuze et al., 2009).  
The composition of igneous melts is controlled by the chemical composition of the source, 
differentiation during magma ascent and trace element compatibility with the mineral phase. 
The depletion of HREE relative to the LREE is controlled by HREE partitioning into garnet, 
hornblende  and  pyroxenes  (White,2012).  According  to  Doumbia  et  al.,  1998,  this  indicates 
that the granodiorite melt was derived from partial melting of oceanic lithosphere at pressures 
where garnet and amphiboles are stable.  The negative Nb-Ta anomaly is widely regarded as 
an  indicator  of  subduction  and  crustal  contamination  (Fig  6.2.3.)  (Rollinson,  1993). 
Metasomitization of oceanic lithosphere is  considered to  be  the  cause the  LILE  enrichment 
relative to HFSE in the granodiorite (Holland & Turekian, 2003).  
30

--- Page 31 ---
The spider diagram of the studied granodiorite is comparable with spider diagrams for the 
Dabakala region in Côte d’lvoire  (appendix 1) (Gasquet et al., 2003). The diagrams exhibit 
negative  Ta,  Ti  and  Nb,  which  are  usually  associated  with  titaniferous  minerals  retained  in 
the  residuum  (White,  2012).  A  negative  Ce  and  Nb  anomaly  is  generally  regarded  as  an 
indicator  of  crustal  contamination  (fig  6.2.2.)  (Rollinson,  1993).  The  positive  Sr  anomaly 
attests to  declining role of plagioclase in  melt  production (Holland &  Turekian, 2003). The 
positive  Sr  coupled  with  Eu  anomaly,  indicates  that  plagioclase  was  not  retained  in  the 
residuum  during  partial  melting  or  fractionated  during  magma  differentiation  (Rollinson, 
1993; Holland & Turekian, 2003). 
7.4.  Deformation and metamorphism 
Metamorphism and deformation leads to mineralogical and structural changes in the rock. 
The two occur in response to temperature, pressure and fluid variations. The processes lead to 
changes in mineral phase, shape, orientation and grain-size. 
Gneiss and migmatite 
The  mineral  assemblage  in  the  gneisses  and  migmatites  (hornblende,  biotite,  quartz, 
plagioclase,  microcline,  epidote,  chlorite  and  muscovite)  suggests  metamorphism  to 
amphibolite and greenschist facies. The low microstructures in the gneiss and migmatites are 
similar to those in granodiorite. However, high temperature microstructures were observed in 
the  gneiss  and  migmatites.  The  occurrence  of  both  high  and  low  temperature  metamorphic 
minerals  and  microstructures  indicates  at  least  two  deformation  events  (D1-D2).  The  first 
deformation event (D1) lead to amphibolites facies metamorphism and was followed by D2. 
D2 lead to the development of low temperature overprint. 
The  samples  exhibit  cataclasis  of  feldspar,  plagioclase  and  quartz.  This  occurs  at 
temperature  below  300°C.  (Pryer,  1993).  Other  low  temperature  microstructures  (including 
bulging,  sub-grain  rotation  and  sub-grain  formation)  observed  in  the  gneiss  and  migmatites 
are similar to microstructures in granodiorite. Theses microstructures are discussed in detail 
in the following section.  
The  gneiss  and  migmatites  were  found  to  preserve  microstructures  that  indicate  high 
metamorphic  temperatures.  The  samples  exhibit  an  increase  in  sub-grain  formation  and 
rotation relative to the granodiorite. According to Stipp et al., 2002 an increase in sub-grain 
formation  and  rotation  is  attributed  to  an  increase  in  temperature,  where  grain  boundary 
31

--- Page 32 ---
migration  becomes  the  dominate  feature.  The  development  of  quartz  with  chessboard 
extinction  occurs  during  inversion  of  α-quartz  to  β-quartz  which  occurs  at  630°  ±  30°C 
(Kruhl, 1996).Based on quartz with chessboard extinction  metamorphic temperatures that the 
gneiss and migmatites experienced where at least 630°C. 
Granodiorite 
Subsequent 
to  magma  emplacement  and  crystallisation, 
the  granodiorite  was 
metamorphosed  and  deformed.  Epidote  and  chlorite  found  in  the  sample  suggests 
metamorphism  to  greenschist  facies.  Microstructures  in  the  samples  seem  to  support  low 
temperature metamorphism. 
Fracturing  of  plagioclase,  microcline  and  quartz  as  the  predominate  method  of 
deformation typically occurs at  greenschist facies metamorphism (Gapais, 1989). Cataclasis 
is usually accompanied by the development of undulose extinction and deformation banding 
in  quartz  at  280  ±30°C  (Pryer,  1993).  Undulose  extinction  in  quartz  occurs  at  a  higher 
temperature range, between 400 and 500°C (Passchier and Trouw, 2005). 
With increasing temperature, grain boundary migration becomes the dominate method of 
deformation (Stipp et al., 2002). Grain boundary migration (GBM) includes low temperature 
pressure solution/bulging, sub-grain formation and rotation. Pressure solution develops along 
high  strain  regions  along  grain  boundaries  (Pryer,  1993).  Fluid  along  the  grain  boundaries 
facilitates dissolution and grain boundary migration (Passchier and Trouw, 2005).  
Sub-grain formation and rotation lead to the development of core-and-mantle structures in 
quartz-  feldspathic  minerals  (Stipp  et  al.,  2002).  According  to  Passchier  and  Trouw,  2005, 
core-and-mantle  structures  in  feldspar  develop  at  temperatures  above  450°C.  Core-and-
mantle  structures  were  not  found  in  the  granodiorite.  This  may  indicate  that  maximum 
metamorphic temperatures did not exceed 450°C. 
32

--- Page 33 ---
Fig  7.4.1.  The  adjacent  grains  have  different  dislocation  concentration.  The  grain  with  the  lowest 
dislocation  concentration  will  migrate  towards  the  grain  with  higher  dislocation  density.  The  bulge 
will eventually pinch off and form a strain-free grain (Passchier and Trouw, 2005). 
Fig  7.4.2.  The  centre  of  the  mineral  is  referred  to  as  the  core,  surrounded  by  mantle.  The  mantle 
develops  from  either  sub-grain  formation  that  is  concentrated  on  the  grain  boundaries  of  ductile 
deformation of the mineral (Passchier and Trouw, 2005). 
33

--- Page 34 ---
7.5.  Comparison other regions in the craton similar to the study area 
Granitoid  intrusion  associated  with  orthogneiss  and  migmatites  where  previously 
described by Hirdes et al., 1996, Doumbia et al., 1998, Gasquet et al., 2003, Naba et al., 2004 
and Vegas et al., 2008. The Pissila batholith and the Saaba zone gneiss are petrologically and 
geochemically  similar  to  gneissic  terranes  in  the  sodic  calc-alkaline  granitoids  in  the 
Dabakala region, Côte d’lvoire and the batholiths in north eastern Burkina Faso (appendix 1). 
Therefore,  the  Pissila  batholith  and  the  Saaba  zone  were  possibly  derived  from  similar 
processes  that  formed  the  above  regions.  In  both  regions  the  granitoids  are  associated  with 
first  group  of  granitoid  intrusion  ca  2.1  Ga,  which  is  similar  to  the  age  (2143  ±12  Ma  and 
2117 ±17Ma) of the Pissila batholith (Gasquet et al., 2003, Vegas et al., 2008). 
In  a  study  of  granitoid-gneissic  terrane  in  the  Dabakala  region,  Hirdes  et  al.,  1996 
proposed  that  the  gneisses  where  intruded  by  younger  batholiths.  The  intrusion  leads  to 
partial  melting  and  subsequent  migmatitisation  of  the  gneisses  (Naba  et  al.,  2003). 
Geochronology of the gneiss produced age ca 2.3 Ga (Gasquet et al., 2003).  The gneiss and 
batholiths  are  cross-cut  by  alkaline  granites  (Vegas  et  al.,  2008).  The  alkaline  granites  are 
associated  with  second  generation  pluton  that  intruded  into  the  batholiths  (Doumbia  et  al., 
1998). 
Despite the petrological and geochemical similarities with other granitoid-gneissic terranes 
in  the  craton,  rocks  from  the  study  area  exhibit  some  variation.  The  alkaline  granites  are 
pegmatoidal  and biotite  bearing  (Vegas et  al., 2008). The  alkaline  granites (K-rich vein) in 
the  study  Saaba  zone  gneiss  are  fine-grained  and  contain  little  to  no  biotite.  The  alkaline 
granite/K-rich vein exhibit a REE pattern similar to the gneiss. The REE pattern may suggest 
the alkaline granite/K-rich vein were derived from a source similar to the gneiss and not from 
an intrusion unrelated to the gneiss.  
34

--- Page 35 ---
8. Conclusion 
Petrology  and  geochemistry  suggests  the  Pissila batholith  and  the Saaba  zone  gneiss  are 
differ  from  each  other.  The  gneisses  exhibit  some  affiliations  to  Archean  TTG.  The  Pissila 
batholith  does  not  vary  too  much  from  other  calc-alkaline  intrusions  in  the  craton. 
Geochronology  of  the  batholith  produces  age  of  2143  ±12  Ma  and  2117  ±17  Ma. 
Emplacement was coeval with the Eburnean orogeny ca 2.1 Ga.  
The  Pissila  batholith  and  the  Saaba  zone  exhibit  some  similarities  to  granitoid-gneissic 
terranes  in  Côte  d’lvoire,  NE  Burkina  Faso  and  Senegal.  The  study  area  may  have  formed 
under  processes  similar  to  those  that  formed  granitoid-gneisses  in  the  above  countries. 
Therefore, the Saaba zone was possibly intruded by the Pissila batholith. The intrusion leads 
to partial melting and migmatization of the gneisses. 
Analysis of microstructures in the Pissila batholith and the Saaba zone gneiss suggests the 
rocks were subjected to two deformation events. The Saaba zone gneiss and migmatites was 
deformed to amphibolites facies during D1 deformation event. D2 lead to greenschist facies 
metamorphism of both the Pissila batholith and the Saaba zone.  
Despite petrography and geochemistry indicating that the  Pissila batholith and the Saaba 
zone gneiss are unrelated, more conclusive data is required. Therefore, geochronology of the 
Saaba  zone  is  necessary  to  validate  the  study  results.  Geochronology  would  also  allow  for 
better comparison of the study area to other granitoid-gneissic terranes in the craton. 
35

--- Page 36 ---
9. 
Acknowledgment  
The  author  would  like  to  thank  Profs.  Ncube-Hein  and  Saalmann  for  their  supervision,  the 
West  African  Exploration  Initative  (WAXI)  group  for  sponsoring  the  project  and  the  Earth 
Lab staff in the University of the Witwatersrand.   
36

--- Page 37 ---
Appendix 1 
REE diagrams of the Dabakala region in Côte d’lvoire (Gasquet et al., 2003) 
Spider diagram of the Dabakala region in Côte d’lvoire (Gasquet et al., 2003) 
37

--- Page 38 ---
Spider diagram of the sodic calc alkaline grainoids (Doumbia et al., 1998) 
38
