
--- Page 5 ---
Abstract 
The Sadiola Hill deposit in Western Mali is located within the Kedougou-Kéniéba Inlier (KKI) which 
is part of the West African Craton. The deposit is situated within the Sadiola goldfield and comprises 
meta-sedimentary rocks and volcanic intrusions. The meta-sedimentary rocks are meta-greywacke and 
marble which have been metamorphosed to hornblende-hornfels and epidote-chlorite facies. The two 
facies are characteristic of contact metamorphism. The volcanic intrusions are tonalite-granodiorite 
and quartz-feldspar porphyry dykes which cross-cut the meta-sedimentary rocks. The dykes are part 
of the Sekokoto pluton (2083 ± 7 Ma) and are responsible for contact metamorphism in the meta-
sedimentary rocks. 
Two main veins occur in the Sadiola deposit: (1) quartz-carbonate veins and (2) quartz-sulphide veins. 
The quartz-sulphide veins crosscut the quartz-carbonate veins forming an array of stockwork and 
spider veins. The host rocks contain a pervasive alteration assemblage (quartz-chlorite-carbonate-k-
spar-sulphide) with a more pervasive sericite alteration which encloses veins and is associated with 
mineralisation. Supergene processes decomposes pyrite to marcasite after vein formation. 
Mineralisation in the deposit occurs within and/or adjacent to quartz-carbonate and quartz sulphide 
veins. Two styles of mineralisation are present; (1) quartz-vein mineralisation were gold is 
concentrated in margins of pyrite and arsenopyrite, and in fractures and (2) a disseminated style were 
gold occurs as discrete grains in alteration zones. Gold is mainly associated with arsenopyrite, 
chalcopyrite and pyrite with an assemblage of arsen + gold + py + ccp. 
Sulphides in the Sadiola Hill deposit become less reduced with time and temperature due to fluids in 
contact with the carbonaceous wall rocks. The sulphide minerals are consistent with retrograde facies. 
Fracturing and brecciation are part of the whole vein formation process with precipitation of fresh 
sulphides after every fracturing event.  
Gold-sulphide mineralisation in the Sadiola Hill deposit formed during retrograde contact 
metamorphism and brittle deformation caused by the emplacement of the Sekokoto granodiorites 
(2083 ± 7Ma) at the time of the Eburmean plutonism (2150 – 2095 Ma). The Sadiola Hill deposit is 
characterised as an orogenic subclass intrusion-related deposit.

--- Page 6 ---
Chapter 1: Introduction 
The Sadiola Hill gold mine is located within the Sadiola goldfield in the Kedougou-Kenieba inlier 
(KKI), which is part of the West African Craton (WAC) and is situated in western Mali. The Sadiola 
goldfield is located close to the Alamoutala-Sekokoto-Kakadian plutonic system and mineralisation 
has been shown to have a relationship with the tonalite-granodiorite plutons and diorite dykes. The 
goldfield also hosts the FE3, FE4, Timbabougouni mines, and FE2 and Tambali prospects.  The 
relative association of mineralisation with highly deformed and metamorphosed rocks of the Birimian 
Supergroup makes it difficult to derive an ore genetic model. The model is important for regional and 
in-mine exploration, but also significant for understanding geologic evolution of the host rocks. 
A number of different ore genesis models have been proposed for Sadiola Hill deposit. These have 
included epithermal, Carlin-type, Skarn, thermal aureole and mesothermal models. The wide variety 
of models was a consequence of the relative absence of fresh sulphide mineralisation for study 
(Boshoff et al., 1998) in the early days of mine development. However, the favoured models included 
the intrusion-related model proposed by Theron (1997) and Hein and Tshibubudze (2007a,b; 2008) 
and a structurally controlled shear zone or mesothermal genetic model proposed by Hanssen et al. 
(2008). The two styles can occur in similar tectonic settings but they differ in the source of 
mineralising fluids, minerals and metals associated with mineralisation (indicators). The intrusion 
related style refers to deposits that are hosted mainly within and/or in varied distances around 
individual intrusions in plutonic provinces (Lang and Baker, 2000). This type of deposit can be 
characterized by carbonic hydrothermal fluids, weak hydrothermal alteration, low sulphide content, 
and metal assemblages that combine gold with Bi, W, As, Mo, Te and/or Sb (Thompson et al., 1999). 
Ore mineral assemblages in this type of deposit typically consist of arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite and pyrite 
with less magnetite or hematite (Lang and Baker, 2000). 
In contrast, shear hosted deposits were described by Sibson et al. (1988) as deposits that are mostly 
associated with Achaean greenstone belts with few younger deposits known, and appear to develop 
syntectonically in horizontal compression or transpressive regimes. These deposits are mainly hosted 
in mafic-ultramafic volcanic sequences of tholeiitic affinity, but also associated with turbidite 
sequences of clastic sedimentary rocks, and felsic intrusions. Generally the host rocks contain an 
intense carbonate alteration and have been regionally metamorphosed under low- to –mid greenschist 
facies conditions, but amphibolite facies assemblage occur in some areas (Zhu et al., 2006). The 
deposits are characterized by shear fabrics that are associated with sulphide mineralisation. 
The Sadiola deposit is unique in West Africa as most of the deposits are structurally controlled (e.g. 
Ashanti in Ghana; Essakane in Burkina Faso; Tongon in Cote d’Ivoire, and others), but it shows 
similarities with the Morila gold mine in southern Mali which is an intrusion-related deposit 
(McFarlane et al. 2012).

--- Page 7 ---
The main focus of this project has therefore been to derive an ore genesis model for the Sadiola Hill 
gold deposit by contrasting the intrusion related style hypothesis proposed for the deposit by Theron 
(1997) with the shear-hosted style hypothesis proposed by Hanssen et al. (1998) using petrographic 
analysis. The features which will characterise the Sadiola Hill gold deposit (i.e. indicator minerals, 
alteration assemblage and mineral textures) will be used to contrast the two models and to establish a 
likely model for the deposit. 
1.2 Location and Physiography 
The Sadiola Hill gold mine is situated in the Sadiola goldfield, in western Mali at about 77km south of 
the regional capital, Kayes, near the international border of Mali with Senegal (Fig.1). Mali is a 
landlocked country bordered by Niger to the east, Burkina Faso to the east, Algeria to the north, and 
Senegal and Mauritania to the west in the West African Savannah-Sahel region 
(Geographia.com/Mali). The official language in Mali is French with 80% of the population speaking 
Bambara. Muslim is the dominant religion in Mali with a small group being Christian, with the 
remainder practising African religions.  
The climate is subtropical-to -arid with distinct dry and rainy seasons and the dry season is warm from 
November to February (15˚ to 30˚C) and hot from March to June (25˚ to 45˚C) (IAMGold.com). The 
rainy season lasts from July to October. The dominant infrastructure in the study area is the mining 
operations and a mine town that includes schools, clinics and shops for the Sadiola mine employees 
and their dependents.

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1: Locality map of Mali showing neighbouring countries, Sadiola and other gold mines with 
estimated reserves, and the occurrence of the Birimian rocks (IAMGold.com) 
1.3. Aims and Objectives 
The main aim of this research project is to derive an ore genetic model that characterizes the potential 
source of gold mineralization and the style of deposition at the Sadiola Hill gold deposit, by 
petrographical investigation of the host rocks and associated sulphides. Microscopic analyses will be 
used to identify any characteristic indicator minerals which characterise the Sadiola Hill gold deposit, 
alteration and sulphide assemblages.  A detailed study of mineralogy, alteration assemblage and 
microstructures will be of importance in contrasting the intrusion-related style with the shear-hosted 
style hypotheses with which the difference will be used to establish the most likely model for the 
Sadiola Hill deposit. 
1.4 Abbreviations and acronyms 
WAC – West African Craton 
KKI – Kedougou Kenieba Inlier 
SMFZ – Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone 
MTSZ – Main Transcurrent Shear Zone 
TTG – Tonalite-Trondhjemite-Granodiorite 
SFZ – Sadiola Fracture Zone 
QFP – Quartz-feldspar porphyry

--- Page 9 ---
Chapter 2 
2.1 Regional Geology  
2.1.1 Geology of the West African Craton 
The West African Craton (WAC) is composed of an Achaean and Palaeoproterozoic basement that is 
divided into two shields which are the Reguibat shield in the north and the Man shield in south (Potrel 
et al., 1998). These two shields are separated by the Taoudeni basin, which is Neoproterozoic to 
Devonian in age and are entirely surrounded by Pan African and Hercynian belts (Matthias et al. 
2002). The Reguibat shield contains Palaeoproterozoic assemblages in the eastern part as well as 
Archean relicts which include kimberlites (Ennih and Liegeois, 2008). Large parts of the WAC in the 
Man Shield consist of Palaeoproterozoic rocks referred to as the Birimian Supergroup (Abouchami et 
al. 1990; Beziat et al., 2000). The Birimian Supergroup represents a juvenile crust without any 
influence of surrounding Archean continents (Abouchami et al. 1990; Pawlig et al. 2006). The Man 
Shield has been divided into three age provinces (Marcfarlane et al. 1981): Leonean (~ 3.0 Ga), 
Liberian (~ 2.7 Ga), and Eburnean (~ 2.0 Ga), but there is a debate as to whether the Leonean and 
Liberian are two separate events or a single event due to limited radiometric dating (Matthias et al. 
2002). The Man Shield crops out in the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier in the western part of the Birimian 
Supergroup.

--- Page 10 ---
Fig. 2: Geological sketch map showing major tectonic units of the West African Craton (After Boher 
et al. 1992) and location of the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier (rectangle) 
2.1.1 Geology of the Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier 
The Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier (KKI) is the westernmost exposed part of the WAC in eastern Senegal 
and western Mali (Dia et al., 1997). The KKI is a triangular-shaped area bounded by the Mauritanide 
Hercynian Belt on its western side and is covered to the north, east and south by Neoproterozoic and 
Palaeozoic formations of the Taoudeni basin (Gueye et al. 2007). The KKI consist of Birimian 
formations formed during the Eburnean orogeny at ca. 2.2 -2.0 Ga (Abouchami et al. 1990; Liégeois 
et al. 1991).   
The KKI consist of volcano-sedimentary greenstone belts intruded by granites (Gueye et al 2007). 
The volcano-sedimentary units are separated into two lithostratigraphic supergroups, the Mako Group 
in the west and the Diale-Dalema Group in the east (Bassot and Cen-Vachette, 1984; Bassot, 1987).  
The Mako Group was defined by Witschard (1965) and Bassot (1966) as being made up of 
metamorphosed and deformed volcanic and volcano-sedimentary sequences which have been intruded 
by granitoids of the Kakadian Batholith and smaller massifs. The Mako Group is dominated by 
basaltic, volcano-sedimentary and sedimentary complexes. The volcanic rocks are dated between 
2160 Ma and 2200 Ma (Boher, 1992; Dia et al., 1997).  
The Diale-Dalema Group consists of platform-type sediments (e.g. carbonates) which were intruded 
by peraluminous granites which were emplaced at synchronous to the TTG intrusive along the belts 
(Gueye et al. 2007; Hirdes and Davis, 2002). The Diale and the Dalema formation are separated by 
the Saraya Batholith (Hirdes and Davis, 2002). The Diale formation comprises basal limestones and 
dolomitic marbles followed by greywacke and sandstones, whereas the Dalema formation consists of 
interlayered quartzites, greywackes, schists and marbles that contain rare slump breccias (Gueye et al, 
2007; Hirdes and Davis, 2002). The Mako and the Diale-Dalema Groups are separated by a regional 
crustal scale shear zone, the Main Transcurrent Shear Zone (MTZ) which trends northeast to 
southwest (Milési et al. 1989).  The Diale-Dalema Group and the Dalema formation, also referred to 
as the Kofi Supergroup, are separated by the Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone (SMFZ). 
During the late Eburnean, the KKI underwent transcurrent deformation along a network of ductile 
shear zones and almost all lithostratigraphic units were metamorphosed under greenschist-facies 
conditions (Ledru et al. 1991; Milési et al. 1992). Amphibolite-facies metamorphism is only observed 
in the contact aureoles around granitic intrusions (Gueye et al. 2007). Three deformational events 
have been recorded and include a compressional D1 event related to early thrust formation and two

--- Page 11 ---
late transcurrent deformation events (D1-D2), which led to the development of the MTZ and the SMFZ 
(Ledru et al. 1991; Dabo and Aifa, 2010,2011; Lawrence et al. 2013). 
Figure 3: Geological map of the KKI located in the eastern part of Senegal (West Africa) with sample 
localities (modified after Ledru et al. 1991). Symbol explanation: Eburnian granitoids: 1-4 ; Mako 
Group: 4 = volcano-sedimentary series; 5 = intermediate to mafic volcanics; 6 = mafic volcanics; 
Dialé-Daléma Group: 7 = intermediate volcanics; 8 = volcanogenic sediments and tuff; 9 = 
intermediate volcanics; 10 = undifferentiated detrital sediments; 11 = limestone; 12 = tourmaline-
bearing sediments; 13 = undifferentiated flyschic sediments. 
2.2 Mine geology 
The Sadiola Hill deposit is situated in the Sadiola goldfield. The goldfield is a mine camp which hosts 
several deposits which include the FE3 and FE4 open cast pits. These together with the Sadiola Hill

--- Page 12 ---
mine are mined by Société D’Exploitation des Mines d’Or de Sadiola S.A (SEMOS), which is a Joint 
Venture between AngloGold Ashanti, IFC and the government of Mali. 
 The Sadiola goldfield is located within folded and altered sedimentary rocks of the Kofi Supergroup, 
which have been intruded by a number of felsic intrusions. The metasedimentary rocks consist of fine 
grained greywacke and impure carbonates with minor tuffs and acid volcanics (Hanssen et al., 1998). 
These lithologies show evidence of macroscopic to mesoscopic slump structures (Hein and 
Tshibubudze, 2007a, b). Carbonate, greywacke, quartz-feldspar-porphyry and diorite are the main 
host to the Sadiola deposit (Boshoff et al., 1998). The Sadiola Hill deposit is located along a diorite 
intruded marble-greywacke contact east of the SMFZ (Hanssen et al., 1998). 
The Kofi Supergroup is obliquely cut by the N-S to NNW trending Senegalo-Malian Shear Zone, 
whereas the Sadiola deposit occurs along the NNE striking Sadiola Fracture Zone (SFZ) (Robins, 
2006). The SFZ follows the steeply westerly dipping contact between greywacke to the west and 
impure carbonates to the east and its wallrock are intruded by discontinuous diorite and quartz-
feldspar-porphyry dykes (Hanssen et al., 1998; Robins, 2006). 
The Sadiola Hill deposit is also located at the margin of the inner and intermediate contact 
metamorphic aureole of the Alamoutala-Sekekoto plutonic system identified by (Hein and 
Tshibubudze, 2007b). Dating of the Alamoutala-Sekekoto granodiorite gave an age of 2083 ± 7 Ma 
and is taken as the age of gold mineralisation in the Sadiola goldfield (U-Pb zircon) (WAXI, 2013). 
Based on geophysical data, the plutonic system is interpreted to be situated directly below the Sadiola 
goldfield and is represented by projections of tonalite dykes in pits from the upper surface of the 
pluton, and it crops out at Alamoutala (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b). 
Alteration assemblages identified include calc-silicate, potassic, chlorite–calcite, carbonate and 
silicification with gold mainly associated with both arsenic and antimony dominated sulphide 
assemblages including arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite, pyrite, stibnite and gudmuntite (Hanssen et al., 1998; 
Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b). 
Ore reserves and resources at the Sadiola Hill deposit have been estimated as of 31 December 2012, 
using an average of $2000/oz. gold price in accordance with JORC (IAMGold.com). In Sadiola Hill, 
mining is carried using conventional open-pit techniques with a carbon-in pulp processing plant 
(InfoMine.com). The processing plant is capable of treating 5.3 Mt of saprolite ores per year and has a 
75% sulphide recovery (IAMGold.com). The table below shows the estimated ore reserves and 
resources from IAMGold Corp.

--- Page 13 ---
Lithology 
The steeply west dipping lithologies of the Sadiola Hill gold deposit are dominated by greywacke, 
carbonate, marble and volcanics as recorded by Hanssen et al. (1998). The greywacke forms the 
hangingwall of the deposit. Greywacke and feldspathic greywacke are biotite bearing (Hanssen et al., 
1998; Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b). These greywacke units are massive with sharp bases (to the 
west), show an upward gradation and cross bedding at all scales, and are best developed to the west of 
the SFZ (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b; Boshoff et al., 1998). 
Carbonate rocks in the Sadiola deposit are impure marble which consists of alternating beds of dark 
pelite-rich carbonate and light coloured carbonate rich beds (Hanssen et al., 1998). The carbonates 
include a massive, grey dolomite-marble and carbonaceous greywacke, and siltstone units which 
occur in a number of pits within the Sadiola goldfield (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007a, b).  
The igneous rocks at the Sadiola mine include diorite, lamprophyre dykes and quartz-feldspar 
porphyry. The diorite is composed of alkali-rich plagioclase and hornblende, and grades into coarse 
biotite-rich diorite which contains sulphides (Hanssen et al., 1998; Hein, 2008). This intrusion was 
characterized by Theron (1997a) as having similar composition as the TTG suite rocks, which are 
widespread across the WAC (WAXI, 2013).  
The quartz-feldspar-porphyry (QFP) dykes have been recorded in outcrop in the Sadiola opencast 
(Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007a).The quartz porphyry host rare tourmaline crystals (Hanssen et al., 
1998).  QFP dykes often intrude along steep west dipping, NNE trending faults and crosscut the 
diorites (Robins, 2006). 
Structure 
The Sadiola deposit occurs in the steeply dipping, NNE striking SFZ and NE-trending fault splays 
Voet (1997). Hanssen et al. (1998) stated that the SFZ crosscuts all pre-existing structures and forms a 
fault contact between greywacke units on the west and marbles on the east of the pit. Hanssen et al. 
(1998) concluded that NE and NW-trending stacking faults crosscut the orebody; in contrast Voet 
(1997) stated that the NE trends are due to folds cross-cutting the orebody.

--- Page 14 ---
Hein and Tshibubudze (2007b) recorded that the Sadiola opencast contains an N-trending zone of 
north and NE-trending fractures, faults, and quartz-sulphide veins which cross-cut all 
metasedimentary sequences, NE-trending folds in the metasedimentary sequence, and tonalite dykes. 
The folds are crosscut and intruded by tonalite dykes indicating that folding preceded dyke 
emplacement whereas the tonalite dykes are crosscut by mineralised veins suggesting that quartz-
sulphide vein were formed at a later stage (Hein, 2008). 
Metamorphism  
The Birimian sequence in which the Sadiola Hill deposit has been affected by metamorphism 
associated with the Eburnean orogeny (Hasting, 1982) with regional metamorphism to greenschist 
facies and contact metamorphism to hornblende-hornfels and epidote-chlorite facies (Hein and 
Tshibubudze, 2007a, b). The low-pressure greenschist facies is indicated by the mineral assemblage 
muscovite, chlorite ± biotite (Ledru et al., 1991). The greenschist facies mineral assemblage is fine 
grained and shows a granoblastic texture, and indicates biotite-chlorite alteration (Liégeois et al., 
1991). 
The contact metamorphism contains two zones, the inner and the middle aureole which is a result of 
the emplacement of tonalite-granodiorite plutons and the tonalite dykes (Hein and Tshibubudze, 
2007a, b). The carbonates in the Sadiola Hill deposit are recrystallized to marbles and attained 
hornblende-hornfels facies in the inner aureole (Ledru et al., 1991; Hein et al., 2004). The middle 
aureole is characterized by epidote-albite facies and within it, primary sedimentary features are 
preserved (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007b; Hein, 2008). 
Gold mineralisation and metallogenesis 
Gold mineralisation has been closely associated with the steep dipping SFZ, sub-parallel structures 
and minor faults splaying off the SFZ (Hanssen et al. 1998). Ranson (1998)  further suggested that the 
main zones of mineralisation underlies the large diorite sill which intruded along thrust planes of the 
feeder zone within the SFZ, and because the SFZ has been modelled as the principle displacement 
zone of the D2 event, therefore both the diorite intrusion and mineralisation were related to the D2 
event. In both cases, mineralisation has been recorded as to have occurred as disseminated around 
veins in wallrock and as massive lodes in quartz veins. Sulphides recorded in the deposit include 
pyrite, arsenopyrite, and minor chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena (Hanssen et al. 1998). 
Two metallogenic styles have been recorded in the Sadiola Hill deposit by Hein and Tshibubudze 
(2007a, b). This metallogenic styles include: 
1. Placer gold in palaeochannels and screes in pits at FE3-1, FE3-3, and FE4. The palaeochannels in 
the deposit represent the Pan African erosional surface.

--- Page 15 ---
2. Gold mineralisation in breccia’s and stockwork veins which formed as a consequence of dilation of 
thrusts and faults, and fracturing of tonalite dykes. 
2.4 Previously suggested genetic models 
A number of different ore genesis models have been proposed for Sadiola Hill deposit. These include 
epithermal, Carlin-type, Skarn, thermal aureole and mesothermal models. This wide variety of models 
is a consequence of the relative absence of fresh sulphide mineralization for study, and most genetic 
models were based on observations of oxidized lithologies only (Boshoff et al. 1998). The most 
probable models are described in this section. 
A report by Hanssen et al. (1998) suggested that Sadiola Hill mineralisation fits a structurally 
controlled shear zone or mesothermal genetic model due to the systematic assemblages of the 
alteration and distribution of mineralization found during the IAMGold drilling project, but this model 
does not explain the carbonic fluids and the base metals associated with gold in the deposit.  
The intrusion related gold system in Sadiola Hill was suggested by Theron (1997b) when he observed 
that gold mineralization is closely related to the granodioritic and trondhjemitic diorite intrusive and 
related quartz-feldspar porphyry dykes. This was evident by the K-enrichment and metasomatism in 
both the granodiorites and the diorite. The late residual magmatic and metasomatic fluids resulted in 
K-metasomatism and carbonization together with gold mineralization. 
A gold bearing skarn model similar to intrusion related gold was suggested for the deposit. Skarn 
deposits are related to magmatic-hydrothermal activity associated with plutonism in orogenic belts 
(Einaudi and Burt, 1982) with replacement of carbonate in the wall rock with sulphide mineralisation. 
This is set apart from other mineral deposits by the gangue, which is a coarse grained, generally iron-
rich mixture of Ca-Mg-Fe-Al silicates, formed by metasomatic processes at relatively high 
temperatures (Meinert, 1992). In this style, carbonate host rocks are converted to marble, calc-silicate 
hornfels and/or Skarn by contact metamorphism. 
Furthermore to this thermal aureole gold style was reported by Hein and Tshibubudze (2007a). This 
gold style describes a sub-division of orogenic gold deposits that are localized in the thermal aureole 
of plutons and form during dilatant deformation that post-dates pluton emplacement and thermal 
metamorphism. They are characterized by fine grained gold in a variety of mineralisation styles and 
are associated with pyrite, pyrrhotite and arsenic sulphides, with lesser occurrences of other common 
sulphides.

--- Page 16 ---
Chapter 3 Methodology 
This research project focused on detailed petrographic analyses of the Sadiola Hill deposit host rocks 
from more than 114 thin sections of diamond drill core and was preceded by literature review.  
The 114 selected samples of diamond drill core and other field data were collected in 2008 by Prof 
Kim Hein from 5 boreholes from the Sadiola Deep Sulphide project for a total borehole meterage of 
1966.02 metres. Core logging was completed after the sample collection. The boreholes intersected 
the Sadiola Hill deposit, and transect from the hangingwall greywacke sequence in the west to the 
footwall carbonate sequence in the east.  
Thin sections were cut and prepared by SGS laboratories in Booysen in Johannesburg. 
The petrographic study (reflected and transmitted light) was completed at the University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg using an Olympus BX14 Petrographic microscope with a dedicated 
camera in conjunction with the Stream Essentials© software. A number of thin sections were studied 
in detail with the main focus on the mineral assemblages, mineral textures, cross-cutting relationships, 
and alteration assemblage and sulphide mineralogy. The results were recorded and used to determine 
a paragenesis sequence for the deposit. Indicator minerals were used to characterise the type of 
deposit, enabling comparison and validation of ore genetic models for the deposit. 
Other boreholes from the Sadiola Hill deposit were used to design a 3D model of the deposit using 
Gemcom Surpac 6.5.1 software from the Mining Engineering computer lab. 
The petrographic study was preceded by literature review using the Sadiola mine reports by SEMOS 
together with other published and unpublished articles to gain an understanding of the regional and 
local geology of the study area.  
The table presented below show the orientation of the boreholes which were used in this study which 
are also indicated in Figure 3.

--- Page 17 ---
Figure.4 Schematic of the Sadiola main pit indicating locations of boreholes (red boxes) which have 
been studied in this project.

--- Page 18 ---
Chapter 4: Host rocks in drill core 
Sample descriptions included descriptions of the rock types in macroscopic (drill core) and 
microscopic scales (thin sections), associated alteration assemblages, and silicate and sulphide 
minerals. In general, the drill cores have same rock types but different mineral textures and alteration 
assemblages. 
4.1 Drill core description 
The lithologies observed from the studied boreholes are meta-greywacke and marble, the meta-
greywacke generally overlies the marble. In all boreholes, the units contain slump folds which are 
dominated by chloritoid spots (Fig. 5a). The slump folds generally occur at depth after vein cross-
cuts.  
Chloritoid and/or chlorite spots are also observed in greywacke that has been hornfelsed. Both the 
greywacke and marble are cross-cut by quartz-carbonate and quartz-sulphide veins which in some 
areas form an array of stockwork veins (Fig. 5b). The marble unit are brecciated (Fig. 6a).  The major 
alteration types observed are calc-silicate, potassic (red staining), chloritization, and silicification. The 
potassic alteration occurs mainly in the units west of the Sadiola Hill pit and can be clearly seen in 
borehole SD 042. At the scale of boreholes, the potassic alteration occurs around and within quartz-
carbonate veins (Fig. 6b), the last one being only limited to marble breccia. Potassic alteration is 
overprinted by chlorite alteration on the western side of the pit (Fig. 6c). Other alteration types 
associated with veins include hornblende-biotite and chlorite-epidote alteration. Epidote hornfels 
occurs in the eastern side of the pit and represents the epidote-chlorite facies. Hornblende occurs on 
the contact of meta-greywacke and marble; this might suggest a possible transition zone of 
metamorphic facies from epidote-albite facies in the east of the pit to hornblende-hornfels facies in the 
west of the pit.  
All the boreholes studied intersected tonalite dykes at depth greater that 300m before intersecting 
massive sulphides and hornfels. The massive sulphides make up the main portion of the Sadiola Hill 
orebody. Ore minerals are oxidised (e.g. pyrite) but pyrrhotite can still be recognised.

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 5: Drill core samples. (a) Sample SD782- 31; slump folds with chloritoid and pyroxene 
porphyroblasts. (b) Sample SD048- 92; quartz-sulphide veins cross cutting each other and forming an 
array of contraction spider veins. Pyrite in (b) has been oxidised.

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 6: Drill core samples. (a) Sample SD022-49; breccia vein in marble with mineralisation in 
microfractures. (b) Sample SD042-86; potassic alteration (red) surrounding quartz-carbonate veins. 
(c) Sample SD129-74; chlorite-epidote alteration (green) overprinting potassic alteration (red). 
4.2 Mineral textures of host rocks 
As described in Section 4.1, the lithologies intersected by the boreholes comprise metamorphosed 
greywacke, marble and tonalite dykes. Microscopically, the meta-greywacke consists of fine grained 
sub-euhedral quartz, biotite, rutile, albite and epidote crystals, which form part of the matrix and show 
a granoblastic polygonal texture (Fig. 7a). Albite, rutile and epidote are secondary minerals in these 
rocks and may indicate that metamorphism reached temperatures in the range of epidote-albite facies. 
The mineralogy of the meta-greywacke shows a randomly orientated mineral texture seen from the 
biotite crystals. In general, biotite crystals have retrogressed to chlorite and/or vermiculite. The most 
common alteration assemblage in this rock type is sericitic-potassic-chloritic alteration, although in 
most cases, potassic alteration overprints sericite alteration.  
The marble mainly consists of dolomite, quartz and minor biotite (Fig. 7c). The dolomite crystals are 
recrystallized and contain inclusions of late stage quartz. Sulphides in marble coexist on grain

--- Page 21 ---
boundaries and in vein-wallrock contact with biotite. Siderite, an iron carbonate mineral, coexists with 
adularia forming rusty stains within carbonate veins in marble breccia. A complex alteration 
assemblage is present, but carbonate alteration is the most common.  
Tonalite dykes have intruded the meta-greywacke and marble and consist of large quartz and 
plagioclase crystals in a fine grained quartz-biotite matrix forming a phaneritic texture (Fig. 7b). The 
quartz and plagioclase contains inclusions of biotite and pinkish muscovite. Pyroxene and hornblende 
are common accessory minerals. Tourmaline is present in the fine grained units (slump folded), and 
also as large crystals together with biotite and quartz inclusions in a biotite-chlorite matrix. 
The ore host rocks are completely composed of sulphide mineralisation which includes pyrite, 
pyrrhotite, sphalerite, galena, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite and gold in alteration zones and in fractures. 
Gold is mainly associated with arsenopyrite and pyrite on sulphide boundaries although it is also 
found in fractures as discrete grains.

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 7: Microscopic images (in plane polarised light) of the host rocks. (a) Sample SD042-84b; 
biotite alteration in greywacke matrix. (b) Sample SD782-50a; porphyritic texture in tonalite with 
feldspar and quartz being the major minerals. (c) Sample SD042-83c; sericite alteration in a carbonate 
rock. 
4.3 Mineral textures of vein system 
Drill core studies revealed a number of vein systems in the Sadiola Hill deposit. The vein types 
include: 
Type 1: quartz-carbonate veins, which are the most common in the deposit. They crosscut both the 
meta-greywacke and the marble units, 
Type 2: quartz-epidote-chlorite veins which only occur in alteration zones; and  
Type 3: quartz-sulphide veins which also occur in both host rocks and are highly mineralised 
compared to other vein systems.  
In general, the quartz-sulphide veins form stockwork and spider veins which cross-cut the quartz-
carbonate and quartz-epidote-chlorite vein systems. This texture indicates that the quartz-sulphide 
veins formed after the other veins. 
Gold mineralisation is observed in all vein systems but also in vein-wallrock contacts, particularly in 
alteration zones around veins. The gold occurs on the margins of arsenopyrite and pyrite although can 
also be observed as discrete grains within fractures and on grain boundaries (Fig. 8c, d). The veins are

--- Page 23 ---
composed of recrystallized quartz, calcite, albite, biotite overgrowth on quartz-carbonate veins and 
quartz being the only mineral in quartz-sulphide veins. The quartz-epidote-chlorite veins are mainly 
composed of secondary mineral that include epidote and chlorite. The main sulphides in these veins 
include pyrite, pyrrhotite, marcasite, chalcopyrite and minor galena and sphalerite. 
Only two fill events were recorded in quartz-carbonate veins. This includes an early stage of quartz 
fibre fill, and a late stage sulphide fill that occurred during fracturing, i.e. episodes of fracturing had 
taken place throughout the development of the deposit. 
The early stage of vein fill was dominated quartz and carbonate, which are also major constituents of 
the host rocks; these vein filled by syntaxial growth of the quartz-carbonate. The alteration zone 
around the veins is characterised by pervasive potassic alteration and chloritization but a zone of 
hornblende-biotite, epidote-chlorite, sericite and tourmaline can also be observed.

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 8: Quartz-carbonate veins and gold mineralisation. (a) Sample SD129-70b; quartz-carbonate 
crosscutting a meta-greywacke. (b) Sample SD129-69a; quartz-carbonate vein overprinted by 
sulphides and surrounded by a sericitic alteration. (c) Sample SD119-64; gold associated with late 
stage arsenopyrite and sphalerite. (d) Sample SD129-67; gold occurring in arsenopyrite margins (scale 
= 50μm).

--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 5: Petrography 
A number of thin sections (~114) were studied using a reflected and transmitted light microscope with 
the main focus on mineral and sulphide textures, and deformation textures. These studies helped to 
develop a paragenesis sequence of mineralisation. 
5.1 Mineral textures of quartz-carbonate veins in the Sadiola Hill deposit 
The Sadiola Hill deposit has complex mineral textures in quartz-carbonate veins due to fracturing 
events, brecciation of the host rocks, alteration and crosscutting relationships. The quartz-carbonate 
sulphides are dominated by sulphides, silicate, and carbonate minerals that form an aggregate. These 
minerals and sulphides are not greatly affected by deformational events but are affected by supergene 
processes. The mineral textures of the deposit are described in four different sections which consider 
the following: 
1. Vein mineralogy 
2. Sulphide textures 
3. Deformation events and textures’ 
4. Supergene processes and textures 
5.1.1 Vein mineralogy 
The vein mineralogy is dominated by silicate and carbonate minerals. The silicate is mostly 
dominated by quartz that is fractured. Quartz occurs in early stage vein fill and as fill to late stage 
fracturing events, and hosts pyrite and chalcopyrite inclusions. The occurrence of early stage and late 
stage quartz indicate that quartz precipitation was persistent throughout vein formation. Three quartz 
types were recorded during this study: 
1. Quartz 1 which is highly fractured and sealed with fibres (Fig. 9a) 
2. Quartz 2 is recrystallized and has irregular boundaries which suggest grain boundary migration due 
to deformation (Fig. 9b). 
3. Quartz 3 comprises grains which overprints and forms inclusions in sulphides (Fig 9c). 
In most of the thin sections studied, biotite occurs as an overgrowth in vein-wallrock contacts, and is 
closely associated with pyrite and pyrrhotite (Fig. 9d). This suggests that biotite was stable during the 
early stages of vein formation. Biotite which is in contact with sulphides forms anhedral crystals and 
it has regressed to chlorite (Fig. 9d), vermiculite and rutile. Chlorite and sericite minerals are the most 
dominant in alteration zones around the veins and in most cases, chlorite replaces biotite.

--- Page 26 ---
Figure 9: Quartz paragenesis in plane polarised light. (a) Sample SD022-44; highly fractured quartz 
with fabrics (qtz 1). (b) Sample SD782-23b; recrystallized quartz and fissural alteration (qtz 2). (c) 
Sample SD782-23a; quartz inclusions in pyrite (qtz 3). (d) Sample SD129-71; euhedral biotite in 
contact with pyrite and pyrrhotite and altering to chlorite. 
5.1.2 Sulphide textures 
Sulphides grains in the veins occur with silicate and carbonate minerals. Therefore are also fractured 
and brecciated. The sulphides also underwent supergene processes. The sulphides exhibit (1) 
granoblastic polygonal texture, (2) crack-seal fibre texture in quartz, (3) colliform texture, and a (4) 
sulphide replacement texture that is mostly common in polysulphides. Pyrite is the most abundant 
sulphide in the Sadiola Hill deposit and commonly alerted to marcasite. Marcasite is a supergene 
sulphide which forms by the decomposition of pyrite and as a replacement of pyrrhotite. In some 
samples, pyrite and pyrrhotite occur together with pyrite replacing pyrrhotite; this indicated that pyrite

--- Page 27 ---
and pyrrhotite were once stable at the same time during vein formation. Three types of pyrites were 
recorded during this study: 
1. Pyrite 1 which replaces early pyrrhotite and contains chalcopyrite inclusions. 
2. Pyrite 2 which is mostly associated with marcasite and forms a colliform texture (Fig. 10a). 
3. Pyrite 3 which occurs in microfractures and pore spaces which indicates late stage precipitation of 
pyrite (Fig. 10b). 
Chalcopyrite is present in early pyrite as an inclusion suggesting that it precipitated after pyrite (Fig. 
10d). Chalcopyrite also occurs with pyrite 3 in microfractures in the wall rock and with arsenopyrite. 
Pyrite 3 is a late stage sulphide and this suggests the same for gold and arsenopyrite as they are 
closely associated. Gold occurs mostly in pyrite 3 and on the margins of arsenopyrite. 
Figure 10: sulphide paragenesis. (a) Sample SD119-58a; pyrite associated with marcasite which forms 
a colliform texture (pyrite 2). (b) Sample SD119-60b; pyrite in fractures around tourmaline crystals

--- Page 28 ---
(pyrite 3). (c) Sample SD782-32a; arsenopyrite and chalcopyrite coexisting indicating that they 
formed at the same time. (d) Sample SD129-71b; quartz and chalcopyrite inclusions in pyrite which is 
surrounded by chlorite alteration. 
5.1.3 Deformation events and textures 
Deformation in sulphides, silicate and carbonates is not extensive. Fracturing and brecciation are the 
most common deformational textures recorded in this study although a micro-fold was observed in 
one thin section. Fracturing and brecciation are cataclasis textures and these were exhibited 
predominantly by quartz and pyrite. Five types of deformational events have been recorded based on 
crosscutting relationships: 
1. Continuous fracturing which occurred during formation of crack-seal quartz-sulphide veins. 
2. Fracturing which accompanied precipitation of quartz 3 which crosscuts pyrite (Fig. 11 a, c). 
3. Fracturing which accompanied replacement and precipitation of pyrrhotite by chalcopyrite and 
quartz 3. 
4.  Ptygmatic folding in wall rocks suggesting small scale compression (Fig. 11b).

--- Page 29 ---
Figure 11: Deformational events. (a) Sample SD782-23a; fracture filled with sulphides. (b) Sample 
SD782-30 (XPL); ptygmatic folding with sulphides hosted within the fold structure. (c) Sample 
SD129-70; fracture filled with sulphides (reflected light). 
5.1.4 Supergene processes and textures 
Supergene alteration is common in the Sadiola Hill deposit because of weathering and oxidation of 
the host rocks. Supergene alteration is responsible for the replacement of pyrrhotite by pyrite and 
decomposition of pyrite to supergene marcasite. Supergene alteration in this study was evidenced by: 
1. Replacement of pyrite to form a colliform texture 
2. Pyrite being replaced by marcasite but retaining its appearance. 
5.2 Paragenetic sequence 
The paragenesis sequence is based on the crosscutting relationships outlined above. From this detailed 
analyses, it can be established that: 
1. Pyrrhotite 1 and 2 was the first sulphide to be precipitated in the deposit. 
2. A fracturing event was responsible for stopping pyrrhotite precipitation and as part of the crack-seal 
events; the fracture was filled by chalcopyrite and quartz 2. 
3. Replacement of pyrrhotite 2 and 3 by pyrite 1 
4. Fracturing event stopped precipitation of pyrite 1 and the fracture was filled by pyrite 2 and quartz 
3.  
5. Pyrite 2 was succeeded by formation of marcasite.

--- Page 30 ---
6. Precipitation of pyrite, arsenopyrite and chalcopyrite. The pyrite and arsenopyrite are associated 
with gold mineralisation. 
7. Precipitation of sphalerite and galena immediately after precipitation of pyrite 3 and arsenopyrite. 
The paragenesis of the mineralogy in the vein systems and the surrounding secondary minerals 
indicates that quartz precipitated throughout ore deposit formation. The fracturing event which formed 
the crack-seal texture in fibrous quartz 1 preceded precipitation of quartz 2, tourmaline and biotite; 
this was in turn preceded by quartz 3. Formation of chlorite, biotite and sericite during precipitation of 
pyrrhotite 1; this caused the biotite overgrowth in vein-wall rock contacts. Fresh sulphides were 
precipitated in all fracturing events detailed in the deformational textures section, this was continuous 
during vein formation. The paragenesis sequence has been summarised in the table below.

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 6: Orebody modelling 
Modelling of the Sadiola Hill deposit was carried out using Gemcom Surpac software to define 
lithological contacts and to map alternation in the Sadiola Hill deposit, but did not prove to be useful. 
The software showed the contact relationship between the mineralised marbles and the overlying 
greywacke in boreholes in a gross way.  
The software was used in an attempt to show the relationship between the meta-sedimentary rocks, 
granitoid intrusions and mineralisation from boreholes in the Sadiola Hill deposit. 
6.1 Software Limits 
Unfortunately, the software did not model the lithological contacts well and only recognises 
horizontal sections. As a result, all the host rocks are shown as a horizontal box, which was not ideal. 
Vertical granodiorite dykes were also modelled automatically as horizontal elements which was not 
logical; the software takes the upper and lower contacts of the element in each borehole and correlates 
them laterally rather than allowing in input parameters that models them as vertical. Mineralisation 
occurs in the marbles as massive and disseminated, but because the software cannot separate massive 
with disseminated sulphides, it shows that the whole pit is an orebody which is not the case in the 
Sadiola Hill deposit. Thus modelling of the orebody using the Gemcom Surpac was not useful.

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 12: The images above show the boreholes and the location of the host rocks with respect to the 
boreholes and each other. Diorite is marked in the boreholes, but is not modelled due to software 
limits which were illustrated above. In the images, marble is shown in red, and meta-greywacke in 
green. Image 3 and 4 contain a blue dotted line which shows the contact between the meta-greywacke 
(west of pit) and the marble (east of pit).

--- Page 33 ---
Chapter 7: Discussion 
7.1 Macroscopic interpretation 
The mineral assemblage observed west of the deposit is characterised by quartz-K-spar-chloritoid-
hornblende-biotite, which characterises hornblende-hornblende facies metamorphism. To the east of 
the deposit, the mineral assemblage is characterised by epidote-chlorite-albite which characterises 
epidote-chlorite facies metamorphism. The two are interpreted to represent low pressure and high 
temperature contact metamorphism conditions and can be considered to be part of a metamorphic 
aureole. The gold bearing zone is situated at the contact of the two metamorphic zones. 
In terms of temperature differences, it can be interpreted that cooling occurred from east to west with 
the source of heat situated south-west of the deposit. The transition zone is represented by hornblende 
which occurs on the contact of meta-greywacke and marble. The contact metamorphic facies occur in 
close proximity to local tonalite-granodiorite and quartz-porphyry intrusions. The occurrence of 
contact metamorphic facies adjacent to intrusions is interpreted to have formed during emplacement 
of these intrusions. Similar facies were recorded by Hein and Tshibubudze (2007a) for the deposit. In 
their study, they recognised that the contact boundary for the two facies is marked by a north-south 
trending biotite isograd; the contact boundary was also a zone of mineralisation in the deposit. The 
quartz-porphyry and the biotite isograd occur close together and have the same orientation which 
might indicate that they have a spatial relationship with mineralisation. 
The recorded slump folds in the meta-sedimentary sequences which are dominated by chloritoid spots 
and porphyroblast pyroxene are similar to those recorded in the nearby FE3 pit by Matabane (2008). 
The FE3 pits are also situated within the Sadiola goldfield (Fig. 12) and contain similar host rocks to 
those of the Sadiola Hill deposit. The slump folds indicate a period of folding in the deposit and are 
interpreted to be related to the D1 tectonic phase described by Milési et al. (1989, 1992). Folding and 
thrusting events are typical for the Birimian formations (e.g. Kadio et al. 2010; Junner, 1935).The 
slump folds are crosscut by tonalite dykes, which indicates that folding occurred at an earlier stage.  
Original minerals in the host rocks have been slightly and/or completely changed to new minerals. 
This is observed in alteration zones were plagioclase has been replaced by carbonate (dolomite ± 
calcite) and locally by albite, while biotite is slightly replaced by chlorite, rutile and vermiculite. 
Mineral replacement reactions take place primarily by dissolution-reprecipitation processes. This 
includes: cation exchange, chemical weathering, deuteric alteration, leaching, pseudormorphism, 
metasomatism and metamorphism (Putnis, 2002). The occurrence of biotite in vein-wallrock contacts 
in the Sadiola Hill deposit is indicative of either metasomatism and/or metamorphism reactions. 
Metasomatism can be seen by growth of large euhedral biotite along vein-wall rock contacts. The

--- Page 34 ---
texture is consistent with that described by McFarlane et al. (2011) for the Morila gold mine in 
southeast Mali, which is classified as intrusion related gold deposit. 
The brecciated units are scattered around the contact aureole of the tonalite-granodiorite (Matabane, 
2008) and formed as a result of high pressure fluid circulation or by dilantacy accompanied by 
hydraulic fracturing during emplacement of the granodiorite dykes (e.g. Ethendge, 1983). The former 
correlates with skarn development described by Theron (1997a).  
The hydrothermal minerals in the Sadiola Hill deposit are randomly orientated (i.e. they show no sign 
of preferred orientation); this suggest that there was no to low pressure involved at time of 
metamorphism. Low pressure metamorphism is typical to intrusion-related gold deposits (Land and 
Baker, 2001), and therefore conclusion that can be made is that contact metamorphism of host rocks 
in the Sadiola Hill deposit is associated with the adjacent tonalite-granodiorite and/or quartz-porphyry 
dykes. Tourmaline is a common accessory mineral in metamorphic rocks spanning a wide of bulk 
compositions (e.g., Henry and Dutrow, 1996), and has P-T conditions ranging from diagenesis to the 
granulite and eclogite facies (Henry et al. 1999, Marschall et al. 2009). This mineral is also common 
in the Sadiola Hill deposit. 
7.1.1 Vein systems 
Two vein systems occur in the Sadiola Hill deposit; quartz-carbonate and quartz-sulphide veins. The 
tonalite-granodiorite dykes are cross-cut by this vein which indicates that they post-date dyke 
emplacement. The quartz-sulphide veins cross-cut quartz-carbonate veins indicating that they formed 
after them. The fractures responsible for formation of quartz-sulphide veins are interpreted as to be 
related to dilatancy accompanied by hydraulic fracturing. The veins are surrounded by sericite 
alteration which indicates that it formed at the time of vein formation. The mineralised quartz-
carbonate veins might be related to the quartz-feldspar porphyry intrusion which cut through the 
tonalite-granodiorite dykes and have an orientation similar to that of the orebody (i.e. SSE). 
7.1.2 Alteration 
The host rocks show pervasive hydrothermal alteration with an associated assemblage of quartz-
chlorite-carbonate-k-spar-sulphide, and a more pervasive sericite alteration which encloses veins and 
is associated with mineralisation. This assemblage is similar to the alteration assemblage which 
characterises intrusion-related deposits (e.g. Thompson et al, 1999; Lang and Baker, 2000). Potassic 
alteration is overprinted by chlorite alteration in the far western side of the pit; this might indicate a 
cooling trend from east to west. The potassic alteration contains adularia (mainly in breccias) which is 
specific for the epithermal systems associated with volcanic rocks (Damian, 2003). Sericite grades to 
potassic alteration in close proximity with the high temperature hornblende-hornfels, indicating a

--- Page 35 ---
cooling trend from the high temperature potassic alteration to the low temperature sericite alteration. 
Cooling features and formation of potassic alteration in high temperature zones indicate that alteration 
formed during retrograde metamorphism; therefore the tonalite-granodiorite dykes are responsible for 
alteration in the wall rocks. Evidence of fluid circulation in granodiorite dykes is represented by 
sericitazation and has been interpreted by Matabane, (2008) as a result of dissolution and re-
precipitation related to fluid movement. Sericite alteration in granodiorite suggests that there was fluid 
movement after emplacement of the dykes. The fluids might be related to mineralisation as the 
mineralised veins cross-cut the tonalite dykes. 
7.2 Petrography  
The crack-seal and open space fill events recorded in the wall rocks are the result of vein growth, 
mostly quartz-carbonate and quartz-sulphide veins. The crack-seal textures indicate hydraulic 
fracturing during fluid-flow events (Goldfarb et al., 2005). Sulphide precipitation is associated with 
biotite in vein contacts and biotite-chlorite alteration in wall rocks surrounding the veins. These 
suggest that the alteration occurred at the time of sulphide precipitation (i.e. from the same 
hydrothermal fluid). 
Pyrite and marcasite replace early pyrrhotite which is interpreted as to be a result of dissolution-re-
precipitation reactions described by Putnis, (2002). Early pyrite has decomposed to marcasite showing 
a colliform texture suggesting a very acidic fluid (i.e. low pH).  Early pyrite is crosscut by late stage 
euhedral arsenopyrite. Arsenopyrite, pyrite and/or pyrrhotite are both associated with gold forming an 
arsenopyrite+pyrite+gold±pyrrhotite assemblage which is described by Lang and Baker, (2000), as 
characteristic of intrusion-related gold deposits. Pyrrhotite is replaced by pyrite and marcasite. 
Sphalerite and galena are associated with late arsenopyrite; precipitation might have been coeval 
with/or preceded arsenopyrite. 
The sulphides present indicate a polymetallic deposit which is characteristic of fluids derived from 
magmatic sources, as defined by Thompson et al. (1999). Gold, pyrite 3 and arsenopyrite were 
precipitated at a later stage and thus coexist. Precipitation of this assemblage is interpreted to have 
been coeval with potassic alteration (Boshoff et al., 1998), although in most cases they are associated 
with biotite-chlorite alteration in vein margins and in the wall rock matrix. The distribution of gold 
and sulphides in alteration zones indicates that they are of hydrothermal epigenetic origin. The biotite 
isograd associated with gold mineralisation marks the boundary between the inner and middle contact 
aureoles which occurs along the Sadiola Fracture Zone, which might have been a pathway for the gold 
bearing hydrothermal fluids.  
7.3 Gold mineralisation

--- Page 36 ---
Gold mineralisation in the Sadiola Hill deposit occurs within or adjacent to quartz-carbonate veins. 
Therefore the deposit is interpreted to be epigenetic in origin. Two styles of mineralisation were 
recorded in the deposit: (1) quartz-vein mineralisation, in which gold is found in pyrite margins and in 
grain boundaries and (2) a disseminated mineralisation style where gold occurs as individual grains 
with other sulphides in alteration zones. The gold mineralisation styles correlate with the types of 
mineralisation in West Africa which have been distinguished by Milési et al. (1989).  
Disseminated mineralisation mostly occurs in brecciated and altered zones around granodiorite dykes. 
This indicates that retrograde magmatic hydrothermal fluids played a major role during 
mineralisation. The association of gold with quartz-veins may indicate that the hydrothermal fluids 
were released during the late stages of granodioritic magma crystallization (e.g. Kadio et al. 2010). 
7.4 Ore genesis 
The main aim of this study was to derive an ore genesis model for the Sadiola deposit but at the same 
time contrast between the intrusion-related style hypotheses proposed by Theron (1997) with the 
shear-hosted style hypothesis proposed by Hanssen et al. (1998).  
As described in Chapter, shear-zone related deposit develop syntectonically in horizontal 
compressions and the host rocks are generally regionally metamorphosed under low-to-mid 
greenschist facies conditions, and also the deposit is situated within and/or around a shear zone. 
Sulphide mineralisation is associated with shear fabrics. The mineral and sulphide textures observed 
in this study suggest that this is not the case for the Sadiola Hill deposit as there were no visible shear 
fabrics (foliation), compressional evidence and greenschist facies. However the Sadiola deposit does 
have few features which are similar to those of shear-hosted deposits, these are: (a) carbonate 
alteration, (b) sulphides hosted in and around tectonic structures and (c) host rocks are 
metamorphosed though in the Sadiola Hill deposit it was a result of contact metamorphism rather than 
regional metamorphism which generally occurs in shear-hosted deposit. 
The host rocks of the Sadiola Hill deposit have been metamorphosed to hornblende-hornfels and 
epidote-chlorite facies which indicates high temperature and low pressure conditions during 
metamorphism, i.e., contact metamorphism. Contact metamorphism occurred during cooling and 
recrystallization of the tonalite-granodiorite and porphyry-quartz-feldspar dykes, and the Sekokoto 
pluton which from the alteration patterns and metamorphic facies assemblage, is suggested to be 
located on the south-eastern margin of the Sadiola main pit. Emplacement is suggested to have 
occurred at 2083 ± 7 Ma, which is the currently U-Pb zircon age for the Sekokoto granodiorite 
(WAXI, 2013) and the age of mineralisation in the Sadiola region, and the accepted age for Eburnean 
plutonism (Hein and Tshibubudze, 20076a; Leube et al., 1990; Milési et al., 1991; Bossière et al.,

--- Page 37 ---
1996; Castaing et al., 2003a, b; Naba et al., 2004). The Sekokoto pluton is part of the Alamoutala-
Sekokoto-Kakadian plutonic system first described by Hein (2007a).  
Contact metamorphism was responsible for alteration in the host rocks; gold-sulphide mineralisation 
occurs in this alteration zone. Mineralisation consists of a polymetallic sulphide assemblage and 
tourmaline which are basic indicators of an intrusion-related style deposit. Plutonism was concomitant 
with hornblende-hornfels facies contact metamorphism of the meta-sedimentary rocks and gold 
mineralization throughout the Sadiola goldfield (Hein and Tshibubudze, 2007a). From the 
observations and interpretation made above, it is clear that mineralisation in the Sadiola Hill deposit is 
not shear-hosted as suggested by Hanssen et al. (1998) but rather related to emplacement of the 
tonalite-granodiorite and porphyry-quartz-feldspar dykes, and the Sekokoto pluton as suggested by 
Theron (1997). 
It is interpreted that the SFZ was a pathway for magmatic related fluids which flowed from the south-
eastern margin of the pit from below, causing dissolution, replacement and precipitation in the 
marbles within and around the SFZ and fault structures which splay off from the SFZ in marble rocks 
(i.e. the SFZ was the main control).

--- Page 38 ---
Chapter 8: Conclusion 
An ore genesis model for the Sadiola Hill deposit has been a much debated topic. A number of models 
were suggested for the deposit but only two stood out, which included the shear-hosted model by 
Hanssen et al. (1998) and the intrusion related model by Theron (1997). The two models contrast in 
terms of style of mineralisation, alteration assemblages, mineral textures and relationship between the 
host rocks and mineralisation. From the study, only a few features which characterise shear-hosted 
deposits were present but the features can also be found in intrusion related deposit. 
The Sadiola Hill deposit was metamorphosed by contact metamorphism during the emplacement of 
the tonalite-granodiorite and porphyry dykes, these dykes are also responsible for the fluids which 
altered the host rocks. Mineralisation mostly occurs in alteration zones suggesting that it was also 
related to the intrusions. 
From the interpretations and paragenesis, it is suggested that mineralisation in the Sadiola Hill deposit 
formed during retrograde contact metamorphism and brittle deformation caused by the emplacement 
of the tonalite-granodiorite and porphyry-quartz-feldspar dykes, and the Sekokoto pluton (2083 ± 7 
Ma) at the time of the Eburnean plutonism (~2150-2095 Ma). The SFZ was the main control of fluid 
flow during the emplacement. Mineralisation in the Sadiola Hill deposit is related to the intrusions 
therefore it is an orogenic subclass intrusion-related deposit as described by Theron (1997).
