
--- Page 6 ---
CHAPTER 9: Conclusions 
74

--- Page 7 ---
ABSTRACT 
10

--- Page 8 ---
1.0. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Preamble 
The exploration of first-order scale crustal structures is the main role of geophysical modelling 
for structures that have the potential to host gold mineralisation. This is now possible because of the 
evolution  of  airborne  geophysics,  which  was  developed  in  the  1980s  to  assist  regional  geological 
mapping (Jessell, 2001). 
Geophysical data surveys are interpreted in two ways: 
1.  Qualitative interpretations to improve the data quality by reducing the non-geological noise 
that affects data from which anomalies may be defined (magnitude, direction, form). It is a 
mathematical manipulation of geophysical data (Mickus, 2008). 
2.  Quantitative  interpretation  facilitates  quantification,  i.e.,  it  determines  and  estimates 
geological  features, 
their  depth,  geometry,  and  block  displacements.  Quantitative 
interpretation  facilitates  the  construction  of  a  geological  model  that  can  better  explain  the 
geological phenomena of the sub-surface using existing geological information (if available). 
Forward  modelling  and  inverse  modelling  are  used  to  solve  geophysical  interpretations 
analytically or numerically. 
Geophysical  modelling  provides  a  conceptual  description  of  the  sub-surface;  it  begins  with 
simple models that may liberate analytical or numerical representations. The results of simple models 
can be used to select the type of geophysical method for future data collection. This stage is direct or 
forward modelling (analytical modelling), and the construction of a model from the data surveyed is 
inverse modelling (numerical modelling). 
According to Wijns (2004), numerical modelling is affected by two factors including: 
1.  The  distance,  corresponding  to  the  error  between  the  initial  and  final  model.  This  error  is 
considered to be an accumulation of errors from the initial  model  to the final model, and is 
equal to the sum of errors from the beginning of the collection of data to the production of the 
model. 
2. The input parameters that determine the final model. These parameters take into account the 
geometry, the physical properties, the rheological description, the approximate depth, and the 
thickness  of  the  weathering  profile.  These  factors  increase  the  ability  to  interpret  the  final 
model that can explain the geological phenomena at depth. 
To be realistic and consist in geophysical modelling for geological exploration, it is necessary to 
combine and integrate information from both geological and geophysical surveys (Lelievre, 2009). 
The objective of geophysical modelling is to respond to the uncertainty and a non-uniqueness of 
solutions resulting from inverse modelling, and to constrain them. The main problem of inversion is 
the  fact  that  several  geological  models  can  fit  the  same  geophysical  data,  thus  creating  ambiguity 
11

--- Page 9 ---
when choosing a reliable model that matches and responds well to the real distribution of subsurface 
properties among a multitude of other solutions. 
Also  most  geological  structures  are  not  detectable  by  only  one  geophysical  method,  which 
therefore  requires  a  combination  of  several  geophysical  methods  to  constrain  structures  and 
geological  domains.  The  combination  of  geophysical  methods  is  an  optimization  that  supports  the 
geophysical interpretation and contributes in determining the geological elements that are important in 
developing an understanding of the subsurface geology. The limitation in optimisation is the cost of 
applying multiple geophysical techniques and methods. 
With this in mind, this project aims to use a combination of geophysical methods for modelling 
by integrating the available geological data to build a 3D geophysical model of the study area, and to 
interpret  geological  structures  and  geological  domains.  Specifically,  the  aims  are  to  (1)  establish 
tectonic domains in the south of Mali and northeast of Guinea; (2) to determine if structures (shears, 
faults, etc.) beneath the thin sedimentary cover (up to 100m) potential to host structurally-hosted gold 
mineralization  for  known  gold  deposit;  and  (3)  constrain  a  strato-tectonic  history  for  the  region  of 
study  from  extracted  geophysical  attributes. Furthermore, this  study  will  make  comparison between 
gold-bearing structures that crop out at surface (e.g., at Syama Mine, Komana prospect, Morila mine 
and Kalana mine), with those under cover to search for potential gold exploration targets at depth. 
1.2. Location and Physiography 
The study area covers the south of Mali and the northeast of Guinea in West Africa (Figure 1.1). 
Geologically  the  study  area  is  hosted  in  the  Palaeoproterozoic  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  of  the  West 
African craton (Figure 1.2). 
The study area is bounded by 10° 13'N to 12° 47'N latitude, and 9° 60'W to 5° 55'W longitude. It 
covers an area of 114,750 km2 mostly across the province of Sikasso in Mali and Sirgui in Guinea. It 
includes  the  1:200,000  map  sheets  of  Yanfolila,  Tienko,  Bougouni,  Bamako  east,  Bamako  west, 
Tingrela, Massigui and Nielle in Mali, and 1:200,000 map sheets of Siguiri, Sirakoro, Faraba, Kankan 
and Falama in Guinea (Figure 1.3) (IGN, 1993).  
The topography in the east of the study area is dominated by a set of slightly inclined plateaus 
with low mountains and extensive plains. In the west of the study area, the topography is dominated 
by tabular massifs and cliffs that attain 900m elevation. Undulating plains occur between the massifs 
at 400 to 450m elevation above sea level. The cliffs of the Kenedougou massif rise to 800m. 
Hydrographically, the Guinean portion of the study area hosts a number of rivers that have their 
source  in  the  elevated  plateaus  of  Guinea.  These  rivers  include  the  Bafing  River,  Niger  River  (at 
Kouroussa,  Siguiri)  and  its  tributaries  Sankarani,  Fié,  Tinkisso  (at  Faranah),  Mafou,  Dion  and 
Niandan (in Kissidougou) and Milo (in Kankan). In Mali, the study area is traversed by the tributaries 
of the Niger River including the Sankarani in the north that debouches into the Niger River upstream 
12

--- Page 10 ---
of the city of Bamako, and the Bani which joins the Niger at Mopti after collecting waters from the 
Baoulé, Bagoé and Banifing rivers. 
1.3. Objective 
Most of the geological studies completed at the scale of the study area have typically been based 
on the interpretation of magnetic and radiometric data, or satellite images such as Landsat and Aster 
(Lohondère  et  al.,  1999;  Egal  et  al.,  2002;  Feybesse  et  al.,  2006a).  There  are  in  fact,  very  few 
geological studies that combine geophysical methods apart from those at the regional scale designed 
for mineral exploration targeting and research. These include studies by Hasting (1982), Ritz (1986), 
Bonvalot et al. (1991), Toft et al. (1992), Tidjani et al. (1993), Mickus (2008), Hein (2010), Baratoux 
et al. (2011), Metelka et al. (2011), Miller (2012), Perrouty et al. (2012), and Tshibubudze (2014), and 
there  is  often  limited  integration  of  geological  data  into  the  geophysical  interpretations;  rather  the 
geophysics constrain the regional geological interpretations. The majority of these studies needed to 
collect  large  primary  geological  datasets  to  be  significant,  but  large  primary  datasets  do  not  exist 
across  all  the  Palaeoproterozoic  of  the  West  Africa  craton,  and  certainly  not  in  the  study  area. 
Regardless,  studies  which  may  have  relevance  to  the  field  area  include  Baratoux  et  al.  (2011)  and 
Metelka  et  al.  (2011),  who  interpreted  the  geology  of  the  southwest  Burkina  Faso  on  the  eastern 
margin of the study area map, and a compilation by Miller (2012) that forms the basis for geological 
constraints in the south of Mali and into the NE of Guinea. 
The main aim of this project is to define and interpret the volcano-sedimentary belts of the study 
area, batholiths, and regional structures that correspond to known zones of gold mineralisation. Using 
geophysical 3D modelling the project will: 
1.  Undertake  an  advanced  processing  of  combined  geophysical  and  radiometric  data,  satellite 
images  and  topographic  data  to  develop  an  interpretative  geological  map  that  can  be 
compared with published geological maps to measure similarities and differences. 
2.  Identify  structures, geological  domains  and the  architectures of basins,  and  the basement in 
key belts. 
3.  Integrate geological data into the processed geophysical database to define the parameters for 
inversion modelling. 
4.  Process  a  3D  inversion  of  geophysical  data  constrained  by  the  available  geological 
information. 
5.  Test optimum inversion data parameters. 
6.  Produce  a  3D  model  of  the  study  area  (or  key  localities)  that  could  help  to  interpret  deep 
regional geological structures and domains and perhaps suitable exploration targets. 
13

--- Page 11 ---
1.4. Hypothesis 
Geophysical  modelling  is  never  able  to  determine  the  exact  geology  in  a  complex  zone, 
particularly if there is no geological information known for the area of study (Mickus, 2008; Lelievre, 
2009). A geophysical model can only be used to characterise the subsurface geology, and to expand 
and  verify  the  geological  information  already  available,  which  can  be  confirmed  with  drilling  of 
boreholes. 
Geological  information  is  qualitative  and/or  quantitative.  It  includes  drill  hole,  lithological, 
geochemical, structural, and relative and absolute geochronology data. This information is collected 
from  studies  that  precede  modelling.  Importantly  geophysical  models  must  be  validated  against  the 
geological  models  to  measure  the  usefulness  of  geophysical  modelling  for  targeting  in  regions  of 
geological  difficulty,  or  under  sedimentary  cover.  Geological  data  is  certainly  needed  to  constrain 
models which are derived from inverse modelling. 
The  available  geological  fact  data  for  the  study  area  has  been  extracted  from  maps  and  plans 
presented by Girard et al. (1998), Egal et al. (1999), Bentley et al. (2000), Standing (2006), Feybesse 
et al. (2006a) and Miller (2012) without extracting the accompanying interpreted data. Together with 
rock property data, the extracted fact data has been used to constrain the geophysical inversion model 
to: 
1.  Identify structures under sedimentary cover. 
2.  To evaluate which geological rock property data has more influence on the geophysical data 
inversion in the study area. 
3.  Established tectonic domains. 
4.  Establish a tectonic history based on relative chronology of geophysical events.  
5.  Characterise those structures under sedimentary cover that could control gold mineralization 
in the volcano-sedimentary belts and local batholiths and plutons. 
1.5. Thesis structure 
This thesis is divided in eight chapters including the Introduction. 
Chapter 2 presents the regional geology of the study area. 
Chapter  3  presents  a  review  of  geophysical  methods  used  and  modelling  processes,  and  the 
methodology procedures. Also describes the image processing adopted in this study. 
Chapter 4 is for data extraction from geophysical maps and geological fact data. 
14

--- Page 12 ---
Chapter 5 is based on presentation of the geophysical modelling results in 2D and 3D. 
Chapter 6 present the key zone interpretation. 
Chapter 7 concerns the discussion of the study result. 
The Conclusions are summarised in Chapter 8. 
1.6. List of abbreviations 
BRGM:  
Bureau de Recherche Géologique et Minière. 
DMA:    
Defence Mapping Agency (USA) 
DNRGH: 
Direction National de la Recherche Géologique et des Hydrocarbures  
DNGM : 
Direction Nationale de la Géologie et des Mine. 
GRAV:  
Gravity or Gravimetric 
GPS:  
IGN:  
Global Positioning System 
Institut Géographique National (France) 
MAG:   
Magnetic 
ORSTOM:   Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre-Mer  
TMI:    
TTG:    
WAC:   
Total Magnetic Intensity 
Tonalite Trondjemite Granodiorite 
West Africa Craton 
15

--- Page 13 ---
2.0. REGIONAL SETTING 
2.1. West African Craton 
The West African Craton includes the Reguibat Shield in the north of the craton and the Leo Man 
Shield  in  the  south  (Figure  1.1).  These  shields  represent  two  nuclei  which  formed  in  two  stages  of 
crustal  evolution  in  West  Africa  (Naba,  2007).  The  shields  are  overlain  by  three  main  sedimentary 
basins; the  Tindouf basin in  the north,  the  Taoudeni basin in  the  centre, and  the Volta basin in  the 
southeast of the craton. 
The  West  African  craton  is  considered  as  stable  since  the  end  of  the  Palaeoproterozoic  at 
approximately 1.8 Ga (Kusnir et al., 1999). The Leo-Man Shield includes the Archaean Kenema-Man 
domain 
in 
the  west  and 
the  Palaeoproterozoic  Baoulé-Mossi  domain 
in 
the  east.  The 
Palaeoproterozoic Kayes and Kedougou-Kenieba inliers are situated in the west of the craton between 
the Reguibat and Leo-Man shields. The Leo-Man Shield is divided into the Archaean Kenema-Man 
domain and Palaeoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain. The Baoulé-Mossi domain is made up of linear 
greenstone belts composed of metamorphosed plutono-volcanic, volcaniclastic and sedimentary rocks, 
and TTG suite granitoids (Lompo, 2010). 
2.2. Regional geology setting 
2.2.1. The Archaean Kenema-Man domain 
The  Kenema-Man  domain  is  marked  by  pre-Leonean  granitic-gniessic  basement,  Leonean 
and the Liberian domain. The degree of regional metamorphism observed in the Kenema-Man domain 
attains  amphibolite  to  granulite  facies  (Béssoles,  1977).  The  Leonean  is  composed  of  tonalite  and 
granodiorite  equivalent  to  TTG  suite  granitoids  (Egal  et  al.,  1999a,  b).  In  contrast,  the  Liberian  is 
characterized by granite, monzogranite, tonalite or granodiorite (Lahendere et al., 1999a, b).  
2.2.2. Palaeoproterozoic Baoulé-Mossi domain 
The  study  area  is  composed  of  metamorphosed  clastic,  volcanic  and  volcaniclastic  sequences 
assigned to the Birimian Supergroup (Davis et al., 1994). The Tarkwa Group 2133 ± 4 Ma Pigois et 
al. (2003) and Perrouty et al. (2012) unconformably overlies the Birimian Supergroup (Tunks et al., 
2004). 
Two models have been proposed for the tectonic evolution of the granite-greenstone belts in the 
Baoulé-Mossi domain. Baratoux et  al. (2011) assigned the major crustal thickening phase to nappe-
stacking  along  orogeny-parallel  thrust  faults,  while  Lompo  (2010)  and  Vidal  (2010)  interpreted  a 
16

--- Page 14 ---
dome  and  basin  geometry  for  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain.  The  domain  and  basin  geometry  is 
interpreted to be the result of vertical magmato-tectonics. 
The  lithological  composition  and  structural  architecture  of  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  has  been 
discussed and described by Milési et al. (1991), Feybesse and Milési (1994), Hirdes et al. (1996), Egal 
et al. (2002), Lohondère et al. (2002), Hein et al. (2004), Naba et al. (2004), Feybesse et al. (2006b), 
Roddaz et al. (2007), Lompo (2009, 2010), Hein (2010) and Baratoux et al. (2011). The greenstone 
belts are composed of metamorphosed volcano-plutonic rocks of the calc-alkaline series (TTG suite), 
ultramafic-basalt-andesite  units,  and  sedimentary  and  volcano-sedimentary  rocks.  TTG  suite 
batholiths  and  granitoids  are  generally  composed  of  tonalite,  granodiorite,  trondjemite  and 
monzogranite. 
The  stratigraphy  of  the  Palaeoproterozoic  of  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  was  discussed  by  many 
authors  (Hein,  2004  and  2010;  Baratoux  et  al.,  2011;  Perrouty  et  al.,  2012  and  Waxi,  2013). 
According  to  these  authors,  the  Palaeoproterozoic  of  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  stratigraphy  can  be 
established.  The  stratigraphy  of  the  southern  part  of  WAC  includes:  the  pre-Birimian  gneiss  in  the 
Oudalan Goroul Belt at about 2253±15Ma (Hein, 2013). The pre-Birimian is overlay in unconformity 
to  the  Neo-Archaean.The  pre-Birimian  is  overlay  by  basalt  in  this  area.  The  simplify  model  of  the 
Baoule-Mossi  domain  was  established  by  Baratoux  et  al.  (2011)  in  the  southwest  of  Burkina  Faso. 
This  model  was  characterised  by  basalt  (tholeiitic  and  calco  alkaline),  gabbro,  ultramafic  lens, 
megacrystic basalt, andesite, pyroclastic flow, pyroclastic and volcaniclastics, dacyte and rhyoloyte, 
Birimian  sediments  and  volcano-sediments;  and  finial  the  Tarkwaian  composed  of  conglomerate, 
sandstone and arkose (Figure 2.1). 
The metamorphism of the Palaeoproterozoic in the Baoulé-Mossi domain was discussed by many 
authors.  They  all  indicated  the  presence  of  greenschist  facies  and  amphiboloite  facies.  In  Burkina, 
Debat  et  al.,  2003  indicated  three  phase  of  evolution.  These  phases  included  greenschist  facies 
metamorphism, following by granitoid emplacement causing the medium pressure of metamorphism. 
The last step was thrusting. As for Baratoux et al., 2014, the Southwest of Burkina is characterised by 
two phases. These phases include a regional greenschist to lower amphibolite facies metamorphism 
and intense folding in the early-Eburnean deformation. In Ghana, quartzite, pelite, quartzofeldspathic 
and granitic gneisses up to 2150Ma (de Kock et al., 2012) were found under static crustal condition. 
Several deformation episodes were also found.   
According to the metamorphic data collected in Burkina Faso, SW Ghana and eastern Senegal by 
Ganne et al., 2014  the metamorphism of Baoulé-Mossi Palaeoproterozoic domain were established. 
The metamorphism of the Baoulé-Mossi domain is characterized by greenschist to amphibolite facies 
assemblage caused by moderate geothermal gradient of 20 to 30 degree Celsius by kilometre.  
The  structural  style  of  the  Baoulé-Mossi  domain  has  been  described  by  Davis  et  al.  (1994), 
Hirdes et al. (1996) and Hirdes and Davis (2002). The domain is interpreted as having formed as (1) 
an accretion orogeny resulting from a collision of island arcs and oceanic plateaus with an Archaean 
17

--- Page 15 ---
craton, and (2) a phase of transcurrent tectonics characterized by regional scale faults (Lompo, 2010) 
and also a tectonic evolution of oceanic crust and continental crust with Archaean basement (Hirdes 
and Davis, 2002). 
Tectonic events recognized in the Baoulé-Mossi domain include:  
1.  Deformation, during the Tangaean, Eburnean I and Eoeburnean at approximately 2190-2140 
Ma as recognised in the northeast of Burkina Faso by Tshibubudze et al. (2009), Hein (2010) 
and  Tshibubudze  and  Hein  (2013),  and  in  Ghana  by  Allibone  et  al.,  2002;  de  Kock  et  al. 
(2011,  2012).  This  event  corresponds  to  accretion  tectonics  and  was  accompanied  by  the 
emplacement  of  syn-tectonic  TTG  suite  granitoids  (Tshibubudze  and  Hein,  2013)  from  a 
subduction slab, or the mafic lower crust (Baratoux et al., 2011); 
2.  Deformation  which  corresponds  to  the  Eburnean  Orogeny  at  approximately  2130-1980  Ma 
(Feybesse et al., 2006b; Hein, 2010; Baratoux et al., 2011); and 
3.  Deformation which occurred during the Wabo-Tampelse Event (Hein, 2010) either in the late-
Eburnean or the Pan African Orogeny at 1.1 Ga (Baratoux et al., 2011). 
The structures produced from these tectonic events are characterized by the development of: 
1.  NW to NNW-trending fold-thrust belts, and NW-trending mylonite zones, shear zones and F1 
folds (Hein, 2010; Perrouty et al., 2012; Tshibubudze and Hein, 2013); 
2.  Regional  folds  that  trend  NNE,  sinistral-reverse  shear  zones,  a  penetrative  schistosity,  and 
dextral strike-slip faults (Feybesse et al., 2006b; Hein, 2010); N to NE-trending transcurrent 
faults  that  affect  all  lithologies  and  localized  at  the  contact  zones  between  the  granites  and 
greenstones (Baratoux et al., 2011); 
3.  Formation  of  WNW-trending  dextral-reverse  thrusts,  E-W  trending  folds  (Hein,  2010)  and 
shallow N or S dipping thrust faults (Baratoux et al., 2011) during the Wabo-Tampelse Event. 
2.2.3. Cover sequences 
The  Palaeoproterozoic  of  the  Baoulé-Mossi  is  cover  by  Quaternary  formation  particularly  the 
lateritic which occupied the third of the continent (Brown et al., 1994). The study area is covered by 
late  formations  including  the  Neoproterozoic,  Mesozoic  and  quaternary  formation  (Kusnir  et  al., 
1986, Egal et al., 1999; Feybesse et al., 2006).  
The  late  formations  of  the  study  area  are  overlain  the  Tarkwaian  group  (2100Ma  to  2070Ma) 
(Feybesse et al., 2006, Waxi, 2013) which is composed by conglomerate, sandstone and arkoses. The 
late  formations  of  the  study  area  according  to  (Feybesse  et  al.,  2006)  it  included:  (1)  The 
Neoproterozoic  which  is  characterised  by  unclassified  formation  overlay  in  unconformity  to  the 
Palaeoproterozoic. (2) Mesozoic composed of massif and dyke dolerite at about 200Ma (Lahondère et 
al.,  1999a).  They  are  also  the  Kimberlite  at  about  175Ma  (Feybesse  et  al.,  2006).  (3)  The  recent 
formation  characterised  by  quaternary  formation  include  the  ferricrete  layer  and  alluvium  which  is 
composed generally by Silt and clay (Égal et al., 1999). 
18

--- Page 16 ---
2.3. Architecture and geological setting of southern Mali and northeast Guinea 
The  study  area  in  southern  Mali  and  northeast  Guinea  is  composed  of  metamorphosed 
sedimentary units including greywacke, siltstone and conglomerate that are intercalated with volcanic 
rocks (Liégeois et al., 1991). 
The rocks of the study area are grouped from west to east into the Siguiri, Bougouni, and Bagoé 
basins,  which  are  divided  by  greenstone  belts  including  the  Yanfolila,  Massigui  and  Syama  belts 
(Figure  2.2).  They  are  unconformably  overlain  by  the  Neoproterozoic  sediments  of  the  Taoudeni 
basin. 
The Siguiri basin is dominated by the Siguiri-Kankan Formation in Guinea, and is composed of 
siltstone,  mudstone  and  subordinate  arkoses,  with pelitic  schist (Egal  et al., 1999;  Lahondère  et  al., 
1999). These sediments are intercalated with pyroclastites or tuffs that are composed of rhyolite and 
quartz  lithic  fragments  (Lahondère  et  al.,  2002).  The  basin  is  bordered  by  the  Yanfolila  granites  in 
Mali (Figure 2.3). 
The  Yanfolila  belt  is  the  northwest-trending  extension  in  Mali  of  the  Ziemougoula  volcano-
sedimentary belt in Guinea and the Ivory Coast (Figure 2.2). The Yanfolila belt and several outliers 
are composed of massive mafic volcanic rock (Girard et al., 1998; Parker and Wilkinson, 2011). The 
Yanfolila  belt  is  crosscut  by  the  northerly  trending  Yanfolila  shear  zone  in  Figure  2.2  (Randgold, 
2008) which separates the Siguiri basin from the Bougouni Basin. 
The  Bougouni  basin  (locally  called  the  Bougouni-Kerekoro  basin)  is  situated  between  the 
Yanfolila  and  Banifing  shear  zones  (Figure  2.2  and  2.3).  The  basin  is  intruded  by  a  TTG  suite 
batholith located in the centre and north and granite plutons (Girard et al., 1998, Miller, 2013). The 
basin  is  composed  of  shale,  sandstone,  greywacke,  and  intercalated  volcano-sedimentary  rocks 
(Feybesse et al., 2006a; Parker and Wilkinson, 2011). The NW-trending Bougouni belt (Figure 2.2) of 
Girard et al. (1998) and Randgold (2008) is situated in the southeast of the Bougouni basin. The NE-
trending Massigui belt of Girard et al. (1998) is situated in the NE of the basin and is composed of 
porphyry rhyodacites with basalt, breccia and conglomerate units (Kušnir, 1989; Girard et al., 1998). 
The Banifing shear zone separates the Bougouni basin to the west from the Bagoé basin to the 
east (Figure 2.4). The northwest trending Bagoe volcano-sedimentary belt is the western extension of 
the Bondiali-Bagoé-Diaoula belt in Ivory Coast which splits to form the Bagoé volcano-sedimentary 
belt  and the Banfora belt  (Bessoles, 1977).  The Bagoé  belt has  been  subdivided  into Syama  belt  at 
Syama (Girard et al., 1998), and the Kadiana-Madinani domain to the west of the Syama Shear Zone 
and the Kadiolo domain to the east of the Syama Shear (Standing, 2000). 
The  Kadiana-Madinani  domain  is  interpreted  by  Bentley  et  al.  (2000)  as  a  back-arc  basin  that 
was accreted onto the Kadiolo terrane during the peak of the Eburnean orogeny (ca. 2.2-2.0 Ga). The 
19

--- Page 17 ---
Syama belt at Syama can be divided into sedimentary sequences of the Tarkwa Group in the east, and 
volcano-sedimentary  rocks  of  the  Birimian  Supergroup  to  the  west  (Girard  et  al.,  1998).  The  NNE 
trending Syama Shear Zone crosscuts the Syama belt (Standing, 2006). 
The structures that predominate in the study area include first-order scale crustal shear zones, and 
second-order shears, faults and folds. The Siguiri basin is dominated by north to NNE trending dextral 
strike-slip shear zones (Steyn, 2012), and a second order scale WNW trending faults. The Yanfolila 
belt is dominated by the northerly trending Yanfolila Shear Zone (Feybesse et al., 2006a; Randgold, 
2008; Miller et al., 2013). The eastern margin of the Bougouni basin is bounded by the Banifing Shear 
Zone.  The  Kadiana-Manankoro  greenstone  belt  is  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Bagoé  basin.  It  is 
represented by a contact that is faulted with gneissic rocks (Girard et al., 1998).  
Metamorphism in the study zone is characterised by regional and contact metamorphic mineral 
assemblages.  Regional  metamorphism  is  characterised  by  mineral  assemblages  to  middle  to  upper 
greenschist mineral assemblage (Tunks et al., 2004). Contact  metamorphism is characterised by the 
amphibolite facies observed in the contact aureole of granitoids. 
2.6. Geophysical interpretations in the regional scale 
Regional scale geophysical studies have been conducted in Burkina Faso by Mickus (2008) and 
Metelka et al. (2010) and in the Gawler craton in Australia by Stewart and Betts (2010). A large scale 
study  was  the  gravimetric  analysis  conducted  in  Burkina  Faso  by  Mickus  (2008).  The  goal  was  to 
control the relation between the gravimetric anomalies and metal deposits throughout Burkina Faso. 
This study highlighted the use of the geophysical datasets on a large scale and the use of geological 
data in direct modelling even in the absence of geological data. 
The studies of Metelka et al. (2010) from the west of Burkina Faso demonstrated the importance 
of airborne data interpretation in reconstruction of the geology of southwest Burkina Faso where for 
the most part, there is little outcrop. It was possible to resolve lithology and structures.  
The  study  in  the  Gawler  craton  in  Australia  by  Stewart  and  Betts  (2010)  was  based  on  the 
analysis  of  shear  zones  with  interpretation  of  the  geophysical  data  by  direct  modelling.  Geological 
data was used as a constraint in building the forward model. The results of this study demonstrated 
that  interpretations  by  forward  modelling,  across  large  regions  with  little  or  absent  outcrop,  can  be 
extremely useful when building tectonic models. 
In  a  similar  way,  this  study  will use  large-scale geophysical  airborne data  for interpretation by 
modelling  of  southern  Mali  into  northeast  Guinea,  as  a  case  study  region,  where  there  is  currently 
limited geological data. 
20

--- Page 18 ---
3.0. METHODOLOGIES IN GEOPHYSICAL INVERSION MODELLING AND 
IMAGE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES 
3.1. Introduction 
Geophysical modelling has historically been the method by which applied geophysicists interpret 
geophysical  data.  Modelling  is  performed  as  forward  and  inversion  modelling.  Inversion  modelling 
allows construction of a model using data collected during fieldwork. 
Inversion modelling addresses the non-uniqueness problem (Tikhonov and Arsenin, 1977). The 
non-uniqueness problem was studied by Tarantola and Valette (1982), Li and Oldenburg (1996; 1998; 
2000),  Lelièvre  et  al.  (2008;  2009)  and  Williams  et  al.  (2009).  They  concluded  that  constraints  in 
modelling were necessary as the only solution to non-uniqueness. 
In this project, advanced processing of combined geophysical datasets was undertaken to create a 
3D geophysical model. A work flow diagram is presented in Figure 3.1 and outlines the fundamental 
steps taken in the development of the 3D geophysical model in this study. 
The  geophysical  data  available  for  the  study  area  includes  gravity,  magnetic,  radiometric  and 
limited electromagnetic data. The gravity and magnetic data were accessed as raw line data corrected 
from  non-geological  effects.  Images  were  created  using  the  GEOSOFT  6.4®  gridding  algorithm. 
Specific datasets included: 
1. Public domain gravity data provided by M. Jessell of the University of Western Australia. The data 
were  surveyed  by  ORSTOM  (Office  de  la  Recherché  Scientifique  et  Technique  Outre-Mer)  in 
collaboration with DMA (Defence Mapping Agency) and IGN (Institut Géographique National). The 
gravity  data  is  divided  into  two  surveys  (Albouy  et  al.,  1989)  with  4  km  spacing  between  station 
points  in  Guinea,  and  3  km  spacing  between  station  points  in  Mali.  The  Bouguer  anomaly  was 
calculated with the POTSDAM 1930 system for 2.67 densities. An example of the gravity data sheets 
is presented in Appendix A. 
2. Magnetic, radiometric and topography data were acquired by SAGAX Afrique specifically for use 
in this project. In Guinea, the data were collected by High-Sense Geophysics Ltd for the Ministère des 
Mines  Géologie  et  de  l’Environnement  de  Guinée  between  1997  and  1998.  In  Mali,  the  data  was 
collected by Kevron Pty Ltd for the Ministère de Mines de l’Energie et de l’Eau between 2000 and 
2001.  The  line  spacing  for  both  surveys  were  400  m.  The  survey  lines  were  orientated  135  degree 
north  and  315  degree  north,  and  80  m  for  the  average  flight  altitude.  Base  lines  were  3000  m. 
Radiometrics were also collected at the same time with the magnetic data. Magnetic and radiometric 
data corrections were completed by FUGRO Airborne Survey Pty Ltd. An example of the data sheet 
is presented in Appendix B. 
21

--- Page 19 ---
4. Electromagnetic data were acquired by SAGAX Afrique specifically for use in the project. The data 
was  collected  as  part  of  the  SYSMIN  project,  with  surveys  conducted  in  2002  by  the  FUGRO 
Airborne Survey Pty  Ltd. The  electromagnetic (EM)  data  available  covers only  two portions of  the 
study area:  the Yanfolila volcano-sedimentary belt and the Syama belt (Figure 2.1). 
5. Geological data was taken from public domain company technical reports, research work, and the 
SYSMIN project. In Guinea it included geological maps of the Sirakoro (Egal et al., 1999a; Costea et 
al.,  1999),  Siguiri  (Egal  et  al.,  1999b),  Kankan  (Feybesse  et  al.,  1999),  Falama  (Lahondère  et  al., 
1999a;  Iliescu  et  al.,  1999)  and  Faraba  sheets  (Lahondère  et  al.,  1999b)  (Figure  1.3).  There  are  no 
geology technical reports available at the regional scale for Guinea. In Mali, maps include the Kadiolo 
or  Niellé  (Kusnir  et  al.,  1986)  Massigui  (Claessens  et  al.,  1988)  and  Kadiana  or  Tingrela  sheets 
(Kusnir  et  al.,  1989),  and  additionally  the  Yanfolila,  Tienko,  Bougouni,  Massigui,  Tingréla,  Nielle, 
Bamako East and Bamako West sheets of Feybesse et al. (2006) (Figure 1.3) The reports include the 
geological map of Mali by  Girard et al. (1998), the geophysical data interpretation of southern Mali 
by  Randgold  (2007,  2008),  a  technical  report  by  Parker  and  Wilkinson  (2011)  and  finally,  a 
geological  map  produced  by  Miller  et  al.  (2013)  covering  the  entire  study  area  (southern  Mali  and 
northeast of Guinea). 
3.2. Data Constraints 
The geological data available for the study area includes fact map data such as strike and dip of 
bedding  and  cleavage,  lineation,  absolute  geochronological  age  data,  and  petrophysical  properties. 
Interpreted data included polygon line data, the trend of structures and bedding, and interpretations of 
homogeneity  within  polygons.  Interpreted  data  attributes  for  many  published  geological  maps  and 
reports have been extracted from magnetic and radiometric data; it is thus difficult to use these data 
attributes to constrain the inversion modelling. However, fact data were extracted to fact attribute files 
when  fact  data  was  recorded  on  maps,  or  raw  fact  map  files  were  obtained.  The  geological  data 
available can thereby be classified into three groups: 
1.  Qualitative data maps constructed from interpretation of magnetic and radiometric data (with 
limited fieldwork data to constrain the interpretation) included the SIGAFRIC map, Miller et 
al.  (2013),  and the  magnetic data interpretations  completed by  Randgold  (2007,  2008).  The 
geological maps by Girard et al. (1998), and Parker and Wilkinson (2011) do not report raw 
fact  data  points  and  are  classified  as  qualitative  because  they  are  effectively  interpreted 
geological maps. 
2.  Qualitative data based on quantitative field data including maps by Kusnir et al. (1986; 1989) 
and  Claessens  et  al.  (1988),  which  were  based  on  GPS  georeferenced  field  data  sampling 
point (Figure 3.2). For example, the SYSMIN project created numerous maps of West Africa 
but was based on extensive field data collection and validation. This fact data was extracted to 
22

--- Page 20 ---
fact  attribute  files  for  input  into  the  inversion  modelling.  These  maps  include  those  by 
Feybesse et al. (2006). 
3.  Quantitative  data  including  petrophysical  data  (magnetic  susceptibility  and  density)  and 
lithological  and  structural  datasets  measured  on  the  rocks  at  GPS  georeferenced  field  data 
sampling point (Figure 3.3.). 
3.3. Geophysical data processing and attribute extraction 
In this study, images created from reprocessed magnetic and gravity raw line data were combined 
with radiometric grid data from SYSMIN. The gravity data were stitched to form one database and 
resampled. The gravity data included gravity values,  Bouguer anomaly values and free air anomaly 
values. They were gridded using 1000m grid cells and 4000m for blanking distance to fill the dummy 
spaces.  From  this,  gridding  filters  were  used  on  the  new  resampled  gravity  grid  to  highlight 
geophysical attributes as discussed in this chapter. The minimum curvature algorithm in GEOSOFT 
6.4® was used to grid the gravity data. 
Magnetic data  for Mali  and  Guinea  were  merged  into  a  single  magnetic database  covering the 
entire study area. The geographical coordinates were calculated using GEOSOFT 6.4®, which helped 
to determine the inclination and declination of each point in the database. The magnetic image was 
created using minimum curvature algorithm in GEOSOFT 6.4® with 200 cell size. This grid was used 
for image processing. 
Radiometric data for Mali and Guinea were merged into one grid. The potassium, thorium and 
uranium grids were created by FUGRO Airborne Survey Pty Ltd. They were compared with gravity 
and magnetic data to confirm attribute similarities. 
The  combined dataset  were processed using edge detection  filters  with  WinDisp®  version 5.06 
and  GEOSOFT®  version  6.4.  Geophysical  attributes  were  extracted  after  processing  to  create  an 
attribute  map  (Figure  4.13).  Attributes  were  ranked  as  very  high,  high,  medium  or  low  confidence 
(Table  3.1).  A  high  level  of  confidence  was  awarded  to  attributes  that  occurred  on  all  geophysical 
datasets while a low level of confidence was awarded to attributes that only occurred on one dataset. 
The highest confidence level map is shown in Figure 4.17. Key areas for inversion modelling were 
selected from this high confidence level map and included the **********. 
3.4. Fact geology attributes extraction 
Fact geology attributes (quantitative data) were extracted from georeferenced geological (raster) 
maps. Geological maps were compiled in MapInfo® version 11.0 or ArcGIS® version 10.03. Images 
from  reports  were  imported  into  GEOSOFT®  v  6.4  and  georeferenced.  All  maps  and  images  were 
23

--- Page 21 ---
georeferenced  using  WGS84  projection  UTM  Zone  29N.  Arc-GIS®  V10.3  was  used  to  extract  fact 
geological attributes in a number of attribute files. Extracted fact  geological data was imported into 
GEOSOFT® v 6.4 and is presented in Figure 4.17. The extraction and integration are considered GIS 
work  and  is  presented  in  Chapter  5.  However,  the  key  areas  defined  from  geophysical  attributes 
extraction  constrained  the  fact  geology  used  in  inversion  modelling.  Thus,  high  confidence  level 
geophysical attributes were combined with fact geology (and petrophysical data) for key areas as an 
input into the inversion modelling. 
3.5. Geophysical Modelling 
Modelling  is  defined  in  the  broad  sense  as  the  model  design.  It  corresponds  with  the  spatial 
distribution  of  physical  properties  such  as  density,  magnetic  susceptibility,  conductivity  and  other 
physical properties. The type of modelling is defined by the objective and the method used. Modelling 
can  be  mathematical,  geometrical,  mechanical  and  kinematic.  It  proceeds  generally  by  using  the 
available field parameters (fact geology and petrophysical data) as the constraint. 
The modelling is characterized by: 
1.  Direct  modelling  (forward  modelling)  in  geophysics  involves  finding  the  solution  model  by 
fitting  iteratively  the  computed  field  to  the  field  parameters  until  a  good  correspondence  is  found. 
These  iterations  correspond  with  trials  where  errors  may  be  introduced.  To  reduce  these  errors  a 
beginning  model  must  be  fixed  according  to  the  available  field  parameters.  Forward  modelling  is 
controlled  by  the  interpreter  and  supported  by  geological  information  that  reduces  the  errors 
considerably. In this study, the magnetic field in nT (nano Tesla) was computed using the magnetic 
susceptibility and the gravity response in milligal was computed from the density values. WinDisp® 
simultaneous  computes  gravity  and  magnetic  fields  from  the  drawn  polygon.  All  distances  were 
reported in meters, density in g/cm3 and magnetic susceptibility in SI.106.  
2.  Inverse  modelling  creates  an  algorithm  based  on  the  response  of  a  particular  geometry  and 
calculates automatically the result. The algorithm permits the introduction of the field parameters (fact 
geology and petrophysical data) which controls the accuracy of the result. The main problem with this 
type of modelling is the fact that it depends on the input, i.e., qualitative data, qualitative data based 
on quantitative field data, or quantitative data. In this study quantitative field parameters were used as 
the  only  input.  The  schematic  in  Figure  3.4  outlines  the  framework  of  interaction  between  forward 
and inverse modelling. 
In this research forward modelling was performed in key areas ******. *** was used to construct 
the forward modelling in 2D. Physical properties used are from the handbook by Telford et al. (1990) 
taking  into  account  the  petrophysical  properties  of  the  study  area.  The  general  formula  of  forward 
modelling is expressing by Equation 1, Appendix 3.4 after Lelièvre (2003). 
24

--- Page 22 ---
However,  the  geophysical  modelling  is  limited  by  factors  such  as  the  accuracy  of  data,  the 
integration of parameters into the modelling, the use of simple geometries for modelling, the fact that 
the  inversion………  and  finally,  the  quality  control  of  the  modelling  result  is  not  possible  without 
geological modelling.  
3.6. Geophysical inversion 
Geophysical  inversion  is  an  iterative  mathematical  procedure  that  can  take  several  forms.  The 
inversion  is  carried  out  using  field  parameters  (fact  geology  and  petrophysical  data),  and  inversion 
algorithms  that  represent  the  basic  tools  for  inversion  (Telford  et  al.,  1990).  The  outcome  is  the 
model.  However,  the  model  is  limited  by  the  inherent  problem  of  non  uniqueness  of  solution. 
According to the Gauss’s law for gravity, two factors can explain the non-uniqueness of a model: - 
1. A surface for which the potential field values are known (in this case gravity and magnetic) are not 
unique because there will be other bodies inside of this surface that will have the same values 
of potential field corresponding to those of the surface as a whole, e.g., two rock types which 
give the same potential field values. 
2. Potentials field data are finite values that are not unique to a rock types or sub unit. 
To resolve the non-uniqueness (in part), inversion algorithms must use the input field parameters 
to reduce the error between the measured field parameters and the calculated parameters. 
Primary knowledge of the body should be used to constrain the solution space to the parameters 
used.  The  area  of  inversion  can  be  divided  into  a  number  of  cells  of  defined  size  and  physical 
property. However inversion algorithms must always address three fundamental questions (Scales et 
al., 2001): 
1.  The degree of accuracy of the input data? 
2.  How accurately can we model the response of the system? 
3.  What are the known parameters on the system independent of measured input data? 
In  this  project  the  inversion  algorithm  used  is  the  code  developed  by  UBC-GIF  incorporated  into 
WinDisp® software (Appendix 3.3). 
The steps which have been completed for inversion in this study area include: 
1. Determination of the inversion area for each geophysical attribute, in particular key zones where 
constraints are applied because more details on geophysical attributes should be completed to explain 
the architecture of the study area. 
2. Smoothing of gravity and magnetic data using the mean filter of GEOSOFT® with five points in the 
window for magnetic data, and two points in the window for gravity data to reduce the noise on data. 
3. Preparation of the input file for the inversion using Windisp® with X=150 m, Y=200 m and Z = 50 
m  on  5  km  down  for  maximum  depth.  These  dimensions  were  selected  for  inversion  cell  size 
25

--- Page 23 ---
definition according to the survey point spacing. It  allows  a good resolution in 3 dimensions (X, Y 
and Z).  
4.  Execution  of  an  inversion  process  using  default  parameters  with  3DMag/Grav  (3  dimension 
magnetic/gravity) interface of WinDisp®. 
5.  The  solution  space  was  constrained  using  the  field  parameters  (fact  geology  and  petrophysical 
data). 
6. Presentation of the results of the inversion model  and commentary about the accuracy within the 
solution space. 
3.7. Image processing techniques 
Image processing techniques are used worldwide in potential field studies to enhance detection of 
subtle  features  that  cannot  be  identified  on  the  conventional  gravity  and  magnetic  anomaly  maps. 
They allow the extraction of the maximum information from geophysical data by transforming values 
into profiles, contours and grids (Milligan and Gunn, 1997). Image processing techniques are derived 
from  mathematical  principles  from  the  geophysical  data  and  are  used  to  remove  the  unwanted 
information (noise) in the data to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Prior to the application of 
the image processing techniques, the geophysical data are conditioned or smoothed through gridding 
and the SNR is consequently increased by applying different filtering methods (Milligan and Gunn, 
1997). A gridding method is itself a smoothing filter; it uses different mathematical algorithms (e.g., 
curvature,  inverse  distance,  add  more)  to  transform  the  data  into  seamless  and  continuous  images. 
Image processing techniques are applied in order to produce more explicit information from gridded 
potential field anomaly maps (Mickus, 2008). 
Image  processing  filters  commonly  used  in  potential  field  data  can  be  categorized  into  two 
groups of smoothing operators according to Milligan and Gunn (1997), namely:  
1.  Linear filters, which are defined as the weighted average calculation of the neighbouring data 
points.  These  filters  obey  the  principle  of  superposition  and  homogenization.  The  filters 
general  apply  to  grid  processing.  So  it  depends  on  the  separated  dimension  and  the  link 
between the closing data points. 
2.  Non-linear filters; these are moving average filters and have been applied in both one and two 
dimensional studies. They compute the average of the amplitudes of the potential field at the 
sample positions within a specific window and remove high frequency background noise. In 
contrast to linear filters, they do not meet the principles of superposition and homogeneity. 
The objective of using image processing filters in this study was to suppress any fluctuation, coherent 
or incoherent noise that is present in conventional maps such as total magnetic field and gravimetric 
data, or  to remove noise  introduced during  field  acquisition  and initial processing  workflow.  These 
were  computed  to  enhance  detection  of  signals  that  correspond  to  specific  gravity  and  magnetic 
26

--- Page 24 ---
anomalies.  The  data  processing  filters  implemented  in  this  study  were  the  upward  continuation, 
vertical derivative (vertical gradient), analytical signal, reduction to the poles, tilt angle, sun-shading, 
filters,  hanning  filter,  mean  filter  and  Automatic  Gain  Control  (AGC).  Colour  shading  was  used  to 
display certain grids in order to strongly highlight features on these images. The shaded colour has the 
same effect as sun-shading. 
It  is  evident  that  using  the  filters  on  the  whole  image  is  not  sometimes  desirable.  So  to  be 
consistence,  it  is  better  to  apply  filters  to  a  small  zone  before  applying  on  the  whole  image. 
Consequently fives (5) zones were selected across the study area to apply filters before using on the 
whole study area grid. 
3.7.1. Vertical continuation 
The vertical continuation is used to calculate the potential field at some altitude or depth from the 
plane on which the gravity or magnetic anomaly is measured. It allows the elimination of a range of 
wavelengths. The vertical continuation depends to the range of wavelength to be removed. Vertical 
continuation includes: 
1.  The upward-continuation defined by Gilbert and Galdeano (1985) as a low pass filter and it 
thus  enhances  low  frequency  components  of  the  data  at  the  expense  of  high  frequency 
attenuation. Mathematically,  the  filter can be described  as  follows  by  Gilbert  and  Galdeano 
(1985) in equation 3.1 
𝐴𝑧(𝑢, 𝑣) = 𝐴0(𝑢, 𝑣)𝑒−𝑘𝑧                     (𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 3.1) 
Where  k  is  the  wavenumber  and  equal  to  2,  z  is  the  continuation  height.  The  upward-
continuation  filter  smooths  the  potential  field  data  by  highlighting  the  long  wavelength 
through  the  elimination  of  short  wavelengths.  The  short  wavelengths  could  correspond  to 
shallow sources while long wavelengths could result from deep buried sources. The upward-
continuation  filter  was  therefore  used  to  remove  shallow  or  near  surface  effects  such  as 
ferricrete, and enhance the regional deep features.  
The  upward  continuation method  seems  to  work quite  well  with the  magnetic  grid  when  compared 
with the gridded data from the same area. 
2.  Downward  continuation  filter  increases  the  spatial  resolution  of  the  potential  field  data 
through the computation of the magnetic and gravitational fields with the measurements taken 
closer to the anomalous source. It enhances detection of shallow structures. This filter should 
be applied with caution, because it is not only the anomalies that are enhanced but the high 
frequency noise as well, and it is highly depended on the data quality and sampling spacing 
(Milligan  and  Gunn,  1997).  The  mathematical  formula  for  downward  continuation  was 
established by Gilbert and Galdeano (1985) as. 
27

--- Page 25 ---
The equation 3.4 explains the absolute positiveness of its value, implying that it is not affected by 
the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field  inclination  and  declination.  This  filter  allows  the  delineation  of 
circular  features  such  as  intrusion  and  volcano  sedimentary  belts  (Figure  3.5).  Its  effectiveness 
involves the location of all bodies of the same geometry in the same analytical signal  (Milligan and 
Gunn, 1997). 
3.7.4. The vertical integral applied on the analytical signal map 
The vertical integration can be applied to the analytic signal to generate a transformed grid with 
the same units as the total magnetic field, but the effects of induced and remnant magnetization are 
almost the same vertical direction (Windisp, 2012). The equation of the vertical integral is presented 
in Equation 3.5 (Windisp, 2012). 
𝑓(𝑟, 𝑠) =
1
2𝜋√𝑟2 + 𝑠2
                                            (𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 3.5) 
With r, s the parameters of the input function. 
The  application  of  the  vertical  integral  on  the  analytical  signal  shows  the  limit  of  circular 
features.  This  smoothing  operator  also  optimizes  delineation  of  lithological  contours,  and  it  also 
defines volcanic belts, shear zone and faults (Figure 3.7). The results show less noise compared to the 
amplitude of the analytical signal  (Figure 3.8). It  is, however, important  to always use the filters  in 
combination to achieve better result. 
This  filter  was  applied  only  on  the  magnetic  grid  to  enhance  the  main  features  and  the 
relationship between the main features. The map also shows dyke intersections and other geological 
features  such  as  shear  zones  and  faults,  which  thus  helps  to  understand  and  unravel  the  structural 
tectonic history of the area. 
3.7.5. Tilt angle Filter 
Tilt  angle  is  a  phase  based  filter  that  measures  the  local  phase  of  the  potential  field  data  over 
images. It is mathematically defined as a ratio of the vertical derivative to absolute amplitude of the 
total  horizontal  derivative.  This  filter  produces  positive  phase  values  when  computed  over  the 
causative  body,  zero  near  body  edges  and  negative  outside  the  body.  This  filter  is  amplitude-
independent and dimensionless, and has advantages over vertical derivative (Figure 3.9) because of its 
simple interpretative properties. It harmonises the potential field and show the positive potential field 
upon  the  anomaly  source  and  negative  potential  filed  elsewhere  (Cooper,  2007).  It  is  expressed  by 
Equation 3.6 (Miller and Singh, 2005) quoting (Cooper, 2007): 
29

--- Page 26 ---
4.0. GEOPHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES AND GEOLOGICAL FACT DATA 
EXTRACTION 
Attributes were extracted from each geophysical image presented in Chapter 4 including upward 
continuation, first  vertical  derivative, analytical signal, vertical integral applied on analytical signal, 
tilt angle and automatic gain control applied on the TMI (Figure 4.1) and Bouguer anomaly (Figure 
4.2).  The  attributes  identified  in  these  images  were  combined  to  establish  a  confidence  level  table 
(Table 3.1). Fact information was also extracted from geological interpretation and fact maps of Egal 
et al. (1999) and Feybesse et al. (2006). Key areas were selected using the confidence level, fact data 
of petrophysics data, as discussed in Chapter 3.  
4.1. Attribute extraction from geophysical maps 
Using the qualitative interpretation principle of Parasnis (1997), and also the pre-existing maps 
of the study area, attributes can be extracted from geophysical data and is equivalent to the qualitative 
interpretation of geophysical data. Thus, the principle of qualitative interpretation can be applied to 
attribute extraction methodologies.  
In  accordance  with  the  Parasnis  (1997)  the  first  attributes  that  can  be  readily  extracted  from 
geophysical maps using the shape of anomalies include: 
  Circular  attributes  or  attributes  of  roughly  the  same  extend  in  all  direction.  This  type  of 
attribute can be generally interpreted as granitic or basic intrusion. 
  Long narrow attributes or lineaments are largely dykes, shear zone, and/or folds. 
  Offset  of  attributes,  where  a  displacement  can  be  observed  along  the  trend  of  the 
geophysical anomaly. This type of attribute can be interpreted as faults. 
  Extensive anomalies with no regular pattern, but where the attributes can be delimited. This 
attribute can be interpreted as basaltic flows, large gabbro intrusive bodies and/or volcanic 
or volcano-sedimentary belts. 
  Geophysically ‘quiet area’ with little relief in the field values without any distinct shape in 
the  map.  This  type  of  region  can  be  interpreted  as  quartzitic  rocks  formation,  monzonite 
and/or limestone. 
In addition, previous geological interpretations based on field data can be used to classify and named 
the geophysical attributes as an entity.  
4.1.1. Upward continuation 
The upward continuation of total magnetic intensity (TMI) map permitted the effective removal 
of the ferricrete layer (which unconformably overlies the WAC) because the ferricrete has a moderate 
31

--- Page 27 ---
to  high  magnetic  response.  The  effectiveness  of  the  upward  continuation  filter  (Section  3.7.1)  was 
tested on the potential field data to improve the resolution, particularly since the study area is covered 
by a thick ferricrete layer. The results were compared with the original gridded data for both magnetic 
at 500 m (Figure 3.1) and gravity anomaly and multitude level  (500, 1000 and 3000) maps (Figure 
3.2).  Generally,  in  all  zones,  the  results  show  that  that  the  upward  continuation  algorithm  tends  to 
suppress  subtle  features  at  the  expense  of  longer  wavelength  anomalies.  Furthermore,  the  result 
illustrates that upward continuation up to 500 m is more superior to conventional gridding methods in 
terms of highlighting the deep magnetic and gravity anomalies. 
The effective removal of the ferricrete allowed identification of NE-NNE trending approximately 
155 km long and EW trending first-order scale lineaments approximately 270 km long (Figure 4.3). 
NNE-NE trending lineaments in the west and east of the study area were interpreted as the Yanfolila-
Kalana Shear Zone and Banifing Shear Zone, respectively. EW trending lineaments were interpreted 
as mafic dykes. 
A homogenous zone of low magnetic intensity on the magnetic upward continuation map occurs 
in the southwest (blue) in Figure 4.3. This area is likely hosted by rocks with magnetic minerals such 
as magnetite and pyrrhotite. A homogenous zone of moderate magnetic intensity (green) is located to 
the northeast and east. A heterogeneous zone of high magnetic intensity (red) is located between these 
zones and indicates  a region of low and variable magnetic mineral  content. A  homogenous zone of 
high magnetic intensity (low magnetic mineral content) is located to the northwest of the study area 
(Figure 4.3). 
The  Bouguer  anomaly  upward  continuation  map  (Figure  4.4)  enabled  the  identification  of  two 
zones of low intensity gravity. They are located in the southwest, and south to southeast of the study 
area.  The  low  intensity  gravity  zone  located  to  the  southwest  of  the  study  area  in  Figure  4.4  is 
coincident  with  low  intensity  magnetic  (or  high  magnetic  mineral  content)  on  TMI  map,  and  was 
mapped by Feybesse et al. (1999) and Lohondere et al (1999) as rocks of the Archaean Kenema-Man 
domain, which is dominated by TTG suite granitoids. The low intensity gravity zone in the south to 
southeast of Figure 4.4 was interpreted by Kušnir (1989) and Girard et al. (1998) as the Bougouni and 
Bagoe  basin,  and  is  dominated  by  shale,  sandstone  and  greywacke,  and  intercalated  volcano-
sedimentary rocks, and/or numerous TTG suite granitoids. 
Moderate intensity gravity zones in Figure 4.4 are located (1) in the far-east of the study area and 
coincide with a moderate intensity magnetic zone, and (2) between the low intensity gravity zones and 
coincides  with  low  intensity  magnetic  zones.  The  later  was  interpreted  by  Miller  et  al.  (2013)  as  a 
zone of volcano-sedimentary rock with granitoid intrusions. 
A  high  intensity  gravity  zone  Figure  4.4  is  located  in  the  northwest  of  the  study  area  and 
coincides with a low intensity magnetic zone. Egal et al (1999) interpreted this region as forming the 
Siguiri Basin  which is composed of  siltstone,  mudstone  and  subordinate arkoses,  with pelitic schist 
(Egal et al., 1999). 
32

--- Page 29 ---
4.1.2. Magnetic First Vertical Derivative 
The  magnetic  first  vertical  derivative  map  presented  in  Figure  4.5  was  used  to  identify 
lineaments  of  which  there  are  many,  circular  to  ovoid  features,  extensive  attributes  and  offsets. 
Lineaments could be interpreted as dykes that trend dominantly EW, and shear zones that generally 
trending NW, NE and north. The NW trending lineaments correspond with faults mapped by Egal et 
al. (1999) and Feybesse et al. (2006). The north and NE trending lineaments correspond with shear 
zones identified by Kušnir et al. (1989), Girard et al. (1998), Egal et al. (1999) and Lohondere et al 
(1999), and include (from west to east across the study area): 
  The  Siguiri  Shear  Zone,  which  is  approximately  81km  long  and  5km  wide  and  is  north 
trending. The Siguiri Shear Zone has a western branch that trends NW. 
  The  Yanfolila-Kalana  Shear  Zone,  which  is  NNE  trending.  This  shear  zone  extends  for 
approximately 235 km long and is 17 km wide. 
  The Banifing Shear Zone (BSZ), which trends NE and is approximately 168 km long and 11 
km wide. 
  The Fatou Shear Zone which trends NE, and is approximately 131 km long and 6 km wide. 
  The Syama Shear Zone which trend NE. This shear zone is approximately 64 km long and 4 
km wide. It has also a western branch that trend northerly. 
Circular  and  ovoid  features  were  also  identified,  and  according  to  Parasnis  (1997),  can  be 
interpreted  as  granitic  intrusion  for  qualitative  interpretation.  This  corresponds  well  with  granitic 
intrusion mapped by Egal et al. (1999) on their interpretation map of Siguiri basin. 
A number of extensive anomalies with no regular pattern could also be identified in Figure 4.5 
and are interpreted as volcano-sedimentary belts. These features correspond to the maps produced by 
Girard  et  al.  (1998)  and Randgold (2007).  These  extensive  anomalies  trend  NNW  and NW  (Figure 
4.5) and correspond with: 
  The  Yanfolila  belt  that  trends  NNW  and  is  located  west  of  Yanfolila-Kalana  Shear  Zone 
(Girard et al., 1998). 
  The Bougouni belt that trends NW and is located to the southwest of BSZ (Randgold, 2007). 
  The Kolondieba belt which is located to the west  of the BSZ and north of Bougouni belt, 
and  trends  NW.  The  belt  was  identified  by  Randgold  (2007)  who  described  its  volcano-
sedimentary character. 
A number of curvilinear attributes in the study area can be interpreted as folds  (Figure 4.5), and 
correspond with folds interpreted by Feybesse et al. (2006). These curvilinear attributes are located;-  
  Southeast of Yanfolila belt and correspond to the Kalana-Kodiaran fold. 
  Northeast of Yanfolila-Kalana Shear Zone and corresponds with the Ouelessebougou fold. 
  Northwest of Fatou Shear Zone that can be named the Farako fold (Figure 4.5). 
33

--- Page 31 ---
In  summary,  according  to the  magnetic and  gravity  upward  continuation  map (Figures 4.3 and 
5.4) the study area can be divided in four geophysical domains. They include: 
  Domain 1 - A south-western domain that is  characterized by  low intensity  magnetic  (high 
magnetic  mineral)  and  low  intensity  density  signature.  EW  trending  dykes  crosscut  and 
dominate the domain. The interpreted high magnetic mineral content of this zone could be 
the due to the presence of dolerite dykes, and/or migmatite and granitoid of Archaean age 
which were described by Egal et al. (1999) and Feybesse et al. (1999) in this domain. 
  Domain 2 - A northeast to east domain that is characterized by moderate magnetic mineral 
content  and  moderate  to  high  density  mineral.  It  possible  to  identify  the  NE  trending 
Banifing, Fatou and Syama shear zones, and approximately EW trending dykes (Figure 4.5). 
  Domain 3 - A domain located between the southeast domain, and northeast to east domain 
that is characterized by  moderate magnetic mineral content and moderate intensity gravity 
signature. The first vertical derivative of TMI enabled the identification of Yanfolila-Kalana 
shear zone; Yanfolila belt and Kalana-Kodiaran fold (Figure 4.5). 
  Domain 4 - A northwest domain that is characterized by low magnetic mineral content and 
high intensity gravity zone. This domain includes the Yanfolila Fault and Siguiri Shear Zone 
(Figure 4.5). 
4.1.3. Bouguer anomaly First Vertical Derivative 
The  Bouguer  anomaly  first  vertical  derivative  of  the  study  area  (Figure  4.6)  resolves  number 
lineaments  that  coincide  with  attributes  extracted  from  the  Magnetic  First  Vertical  Derivative  map 
(Figure 4.5). These features include: (1) the Yanfolila-Kalana Shear Zone and Kalana-Kondiaran fold 
in  Domain  3;  (2)  The  Banifing  and  Syama  Shear  Zone  in  Domain  2.  Additionally,  the  Bouguer 
anomaly first vertical derivative map resolves a series of NW trend lineaments that are not evident in 
the  Magnetic  First  Vertical  Derivative  map  (Figure  4.5).  These  NW  trends  are  interpreted  as  fault 
according  to  the  Parasnis  (1997)  qualitative  interpretation  principle.  They  can  be  named  Menakoro 
fault and Koumantou-Morila fault (Figure 4.13). 
4.2.4. Analytical signal 
The analytical signal was applied on magnetic data (Figure 4.7). The amplitude of the analytical 
signal was calculated for the total magnetic field to enhance the linear, circular and elongated features. 
For  example,  shear  zones,  volcanic  belts,  lineaments  and  regional  dykes  manifest  as  clear  positive 
magnetic anomalies in the analytical signal map. As one would expect, the analytical signal further 
showed magnetic highs over folded lineaments (Figure 3.5). This filter is less sensitive to noise when 
compared  to  the  derivative  filters.  Summarily,  comparison  of  the  amplitude  of  the  analytical  signal 
34

--- Page 32 ---
with the vertical derivative across all the zones of interest showed a marked increase in the numbers 
of structures delineated (Figure 3.6). 
The  Figure  4.7  attributes  coincide  with  those  extracted  from  the  Magnetic  First  Vertical 
Derivative (Figure 4.5) but are enhanced and discrete. The analytical signal applied on magnetic data 
enabled  the  identification  of  lineaments  that  included  the  Yanfolila  volcano-sedimentary  belt,  and 
Yanfolila-Kalana and Banifing Shear Zone. The Kalana-Kodienran fold is defiend as a complex fold 
with multpile fold axes. A NW trending discontinuity (which may be a fault, thrust or unconformity) 
separates the Kalana-Kodieran fold and Ouelessebougou fold. 
In term of magnetic and gravity domains, Domain 1 can be divided into three subdomains (SD) 
including from north to south;  
 
(SD1)  characterized  by  moderate  to  high  magnetic  mineral  content.  This  high  magnetic 
mineral content can be explained by the presence of dolerite dykes in this part.  
 
(SD2)  characterised  by  low  magnetic  mineral  content.  The  SD2  includes  the  circular 
features which in this part may consist of granitoids if the basic to ultra-basic rock are not 
significant (Feybesse et al., 1999).  
 
(SD3) corresponding to the high magnetic intensity zone, which according to Feybesse et al. 
(1999) is composed of multiple types of rocks including Archaean granites, undifferentiated 
granites, granites with biotite and amphibole, diorites, micaschistes, paragneiss and basic to 
ultra-basic rocks.  
4.2.5. Application of vertical integral on the analytical signal 
The image presented in Figure 4.8 is the application of vertical integral on the analytical signal 
map. The attributes extracted from Figure 4.8 coincide with those extracted from the analytical signal 
map in Figure 4.7 but were more enhanced. The Figure 4.8 enabled the identification of: 
  NE, north and NNW trending lineaments that made up the Yanfolila belt. These lineaments 
could be the lithological trends of Yanfolila belt. 
  The Bougouni belt presents a NW trend with magmatic intrusion around.  
  The Kolondieba belt (Randgold, 2007). 
  Linear trend that characterized the Yanfolila-Kalana, Banifing and Fatou shear zones. 
  Individualization of attributes that were interpreted as folds including the Kalana-Kodiaran, 
Farako and Ouelessebougou folds. 
Additionally a series of regional scale faults/discontinuities can be extracted including; 
  The Yanfolila Fault which trends NW. 
  The  Mandiana-Yanfolila  Fault  which  trends  NNE.  It  crosscuts  the  Yanfolila-Kalana  shear 
zone and separates the Ouelessebougou and Kalana-Kodiaran fold. 
35

--- Page 33 ---
  The  Madina  Fault  trends  NE.  It  crosscuts  the  Kalana-Kodiaran  fold,  Bougouni  and 
Kolondieba belt and Banifing Shear Zone. 
  The Menankoro Fault  which  crosscuts the Banifing and Yanfolila-Kalana Shear Zone,  the 
Bougouni belt, Mandiana-Yanfolila and Madina Fault. This fault is a NW trending. 
  The  Kadiolo-Fourou Fault which trends NW  and crosscuts  the Kadiolo, Syama  and Fatou 
Shear Zone. 
  The Koumatou Morila Fault which trends NW and crosscuts the Banifing and Fatou Shear 
Zone. 
  Farako  Fault  which  trends  NE  and  crosscut  the  Banifing  and  Fatou  shear  zones,  and 
Bougouni belt. 
The NW trend highlighted with the first derivative map of Bouguer anomalies is confirmed by 
Menankoro Fault (Figure 4.6). 
Furthermore,  Figure  4.8  enabled  enhancement  of  as  series  EW  trending  lineaments  that  were 
extracted from the Upward Continuation of the TMI (Figure 4.3), Magnetic First Vertical Derivative 
(Figure 4.5) and Analytical Signal (Figure 4.7), and interpreted as dykes. The relative age of the dykes 
could also be established and divided into two groups. The group one was composed of dyke (1, 2, 3 
and 4) and located in the northern of the area (Figure 4.8). The group two was composed of dykes (5, 
6, 7, 8, 9 and 10) and located in the southern part of the area (Figure 4.8). 
The dykes of group two are crosscutting the faults, folds and shear zones in the southwest of the 
study area. It can be established that these attributes are younger than these dykes. The dykes of group 
one  are  crosscutting  the  same  attributes  in the northern part of  the  study  area,  which  mean that the 
dykes of group two are older than group one. 
It can also be observed in Figure 4.8 that the dykes of group two are crosscutting the Banifing 
Shear Zone. The intersection of Banifing Shear Zone by group two dykes indicates that the Banifing 
Shear Zone is old relative to the Yanfolila-Kalana Shear Zone. 
4.2.6. The tilt angle filter 
The tilt angle filter of total magnetic field map (Figure 4.9) allowed the enhancement of dykes, 
Yanfolila-Kalana and Banifing Shear Zones at the expense of others attributes in the study area. It can 
be explained by the fact that these attribute content more magnetic mineral than other attributes in the 
area.  The  tilt  angle  filter  enabled  the  confirmation  of  the  relative  age  of  dykes  in  Figure  4.8.  The 
intersection  between  dykes  and  other  structures  become  important  for  the  determination  of  relative 
chronology of tectonic events in the study area. 
The  tilt  angle  of  Bouguer  anomaly  is  presented  in  Figure  4.10.  It  allowed  the  confirmation  of 
Menankoto and Koumanto-Morila Faults. It confirms also certain faults described in the Figure 4.8. In 
additional to these faults, there is another lineament trending NE. It crosscuts the Yanfolila belt and 
36

--- Page 34 ---
Yanfolila  Fault.  The  Menankoto  and  the  Koumanto-Morila  Faults  could  be  very  deep  according  to 
their signature in Figure 4.10. 
The  Figure  4.10  allows  the  determination  of  dense  materials  trends  in  the  study  area.  These 
trends are indicated by red line with the (Figure 41.10). These trends correspond probably to the basic 
lithological trends. 
4.2.7. The automatic gain control (AGC) 
The  automatic  gain  control  of  the  total  magnetic  field  is  presented  in  Figure  4.11.  The  Figure 
4.11 allowed the enhancement of signal that can highlight the volcano-sedimentary belts underlined 
with images (Figure 4.5, 4.7 and 4.8). But the difference in this image is the fact that it presents the 
connexion  between  Bougouni  belt  and  Kolondieba  belt  (Figure  4.11).  The  Figure  4.11  enabled  the 
identification of others stretch features in white colour (Figure 4.11), trending NE. The automatic gain 
control  enhances  these  feature  (Figure  4.11)  compare  to  Figure  4.5,  4.7  and  4.8.  The  Figure  4.11 
allowed the enhancement of Yanfolila and Madina Faults, the Yanfolila- Kalana and Banifing Shear 
Zone.  The  Kadiola  Shear  Zone  was  highlighted  with  the  AGC  map.  On  the  Figure  4.11  the 
intersection between dykes and others features were also confirmed. 
The  AGC  of  Bouguer  anomaly  is  presented  in  Figure  4.12.  The  Figure  4.12  enable  the 
identification  of  some  of  this  image  presents  the  same  features  presented  with  the  first  vertical 
derivative  of  Bouguer  anomalies  (Figure  4.6).  The  AGC  of  Bouguer  anomalies  enabled  the 
confirmation  of  Bouguer  anomalies  first  vertical  derivative  maps  attributes  (Figure  4.6).  The  NW 
trending Menankoto Fault (Figure 4.12) crosscuts the Yanfolila-Kalana and Banifing shear zone and 
is thus younger in relative age. 
4.2.8. The attribute map from geophysical data 
The  attributes  extracted  from  geophysical  map  were  presented  in  Figure  4.13.  These  attributes 
extractions  concerned  the  first  and  second order  structures.  The  first  and  second  order structures  in 
this  study  were  characterized  by  their  length,  wide  and  probably  the  depth.  The  attributes  from 
geophysical data considered as first order in the study area included shear zone (Yanfolila-Kalana and 
Banifing),  faults  (Yanfolila,  Mandiana-Yanfolila  and  Farako).  The  second  orders  structures  were 
composed by folds (Kalana-Kodieran and Ouelessebougou), faults (Menankoro, Madina, Koumantou 
and  Kadiolo)  and  shear  zones  (Siguiri,  Fatou,  Syama  and  Kadiolo).  The  dyke  of  group  one  were 
considered as the first order structures, and the group two dykes were attributed to the second order 
structures. These attributes coincide with some geological structures highlighted by preview study in 
the  study  area.  This  extraction  shows  that  the  former  geological  studies  were  limited.  The  attribute 
extracted from geophysical data show more structures that were not mentioned by the previous study. 
These studies were based generally on the magnetic and radiometric data interpretation with some fact 
data combination.        
37

--- Page 35 ---
4.2.9. The potassium map 
The Figure  4.14 corresponds to the potassium  map of the study area. This image was used for 
comparison with attributes extracted from geophysical maps (Figure 4.13) to establish the confidence 
level of the study area. According to the similarity between Figure 4.14 with attribute maps (Figure 
4.13) the attributes that can be highlighted includes: 
  The Yanfolila, Mandiana-Yanfolila, Madina and Farako Faults (Figure 4.13) 
  The Yanfolila belt is the only belt that can be confirmed with Figure 4.14. 
  The folds were all confirmed in the potassium map (Figure 4.14). 
  The shear zones were all confirmed apart from Siguiri and Kadiolo Shears Zone. 
4.2.10. The thorium map 
The  thorium  map  is  presented  in  Figure  4.15.  This  image  enabled  the  confirmation  of  certain 
attributes  presented  in  Figure  4.13.  The  attributes  in  Figure  4.13  that  coincides  with  Figure  4.15 
includes:  
  Kalana-Kondiaran Fold zones and Fatou Fold zone. 
  Banifing and Syama Shear zones 
  Yanfolila, Menankoro, Kadiolo-Fourou Faults 
4.2.11. The Uranium map 
The Figure 4.16 present the Uranium maps of the study area. The image enables the confirmation 
of  certain  attributes  presented  in  Figure 4.13.  The  similarity  that  can  establish between  Figure 4.13 
and Figure 4.15 include: 
  Yanfolila  and  Banifing  Shear  Zones  in  Figure  4.16.  The  Syama  Shear  Zone  can  be  also 
highlighted in the Figure 4.16 but the contract in not really clear. 
  Mandiana-Yanfolila,  Menankoro  and  Koumantou-Morila  Faults  present  the  similarity  with 
the Figure 4.16. 
  Kalana-Kondiaran  and  Ouelessebougou  Folds  present  the  similarity  with  the  Uranium  map 
(Figure 4.15)  
4.3. Confidence level zone of the study area 
According to the comparison between the  Figure 4.13  with Figure 4.14 to 4.16  the confidence 
level table can be established. The forward and inversion modelling area were selected according to 
the  very  high,  high  and  moderate  level  of  confidence  structures.  The  dyke  and  belt  were  only 
considered on magnetic data. It was difficult to identify dyke and with other data than magnetic. The 
38

--- Page 36 ---
dykes are generally highlighted with magnetic data in applied geophysics. Using this statement, the 
dykes and belts are considered as high confidence level if they are highlighted by only magnetic data. 
The First order structures extracted included the Yanfolila and Banifing Shear Zone in term of their 
length and wide and there complexity. The Key areas were selected according to these two first order 
structures for large interpretation. 
4.4. Geological fact data extraction 
The  geological  fact  data  are  extracted  for  very  high  to  high  confidence  level  for  forward  and 
inversion  modelling.  Also  on  the  key  areas  geological  data  were  extracted  in  additional  to  the 
petrophysics data of the  study  area.  The Figure  4.17 present  the  fact data  extracted  for geophysical 
modelling and Key areas. 
39

--- Page 37 ---
5. GEOPHYSICS 
5.1. Geophysical characteristic of the study area 
The role assigned to geophysics in this study is the detection and location of structures that have 
strong  contrast  of  physical  properties  with  respect  to  the  host  rocks,  especially  the  identification  of 
discontinuities  at  depth.  The  experimental  models  (Figures  5.1-5.2)  constructed  from  the  available 
geological  data  in  forward  modelling  indicated  that  the  gravimetric  and  magnetic  potential  field 
methods work well and can be applied throughout the study area to model geological structures. The 
combination of gravimetric and magnetic potential field methods is a good way to interpret, identify 
and determine deep structures, lateral and vertical rock variations and plutonic architectures. 
However, the magnetic method is often limited, for example, in determining stratigraphic units 
and contact zones covered by a conductive weathering layer deeper than 100m. This was established 
by Wijns (2009) in a comparative study between the magnetic and electromagnetic methods as used in 
the Syama belt. His work showed that intrusive bodies, which are indistinct in the magnetic data, are 
readily resolved from electromagnetic data. The host rocks in the Syama belt are highly conductive 
because of graphite in the host rocks, relative to the intrusive bodies which are less conductive. 
Furthermore, a study completed by Féménias (2008) of the Banifing shear zone highlighted that 
basement  rock  lineaments  are  well  resolved  in  the  magnetic  and  radiometric  airborne  geophysical 
datasets. 
A  limitation  to  interpreting  magnetic  data  is  the  fact  that  laterite-ferricrete  covers  a  significant 
portion of the study area and major parts of the Baoulé-Mossi domain (Brown et al., 1994; Blot, 2004; 
Beauvais  et  al.,  2008).  The  presence  of  laterite-ferricrete  can  complicate  the  magnetic  data 
presentation  and  affect  interpretations,  but  by  applying  linear  filters  the  effects  of  laterite-ferricrete 
can be minimised in the magnetic signature. 
Quantitative interpretation of geophysical data is critical in terms of discovery of structures under 
sedimentary cover. Modelling is the stage used to achieve quantitative interpretation. It can determine 
stratigraphic  units  and  contact  zones  covered  by  a  conductive  weathering  layer  deeper  than  100m 
and/or covered by laterite-ferricrete. 
This  chapter presents the results of  modelling  and includes  forward 2D  and 3D  inversion.  The 
models present attributes extracted from geophysical maps, their depth, geometries and a preliminary 
interpretation of block displacements. The geophysical transect lines and key zones used in forward 
and inverse modelling were selected according to the confidence level table (Table 3.1). 
5.2. Forward modelling 
40

--- Page 38 ---
In  this  research  forward  modelling  included  three  west-east  transects  that  crosscut  first-order 
structures  and  greenstone  belts  in  the  study  area.  The  forward  models  were  constructed  using 
available  geological  fact  and  petrophysical  data.  The  correspondence  between  observed  and 
calculated data was performed iteratively. The forward modelling aided in the construction of models 
from which the geometry of structures was calculated. Transect lines selected included:  
  Transect 1 (AA’) from GPS coordinates 570950E and 1245150N to 616000E and 1245150N, 
and  measures  approximately  45km  in  length.  It  transects  the  Yanfolila  belt,  Yanfolila  shear 
zone, Madiana-Yanfolila fault, and the Kalana-Kodieran fold in the west central region of the 
study area (Figure 4.13). 
  Transect 2 (BB’) from GPS coordinates 687510E and 1164475N to 721944E and 1164475N, 
and  measures  approximately  34km  in  length.  It  transects  the  Bougouni  belt,  Banifing  shear 
zone and Menankoro fault in the southeastern region of the study area (Figure 4.13). 
  Transect  3  (CC’)  extends  from  GPS  coordinates  704880E  and  1232696N  to  751630E  and 
1232696N,  and  measures  approximately  47km  in  length.  It  transects  the  Kolondieba  belt, 
Madina fault, and Banifing shear zone in the east central region of the study area (Figure 4.13). 
A profile of the upward continuation of magnetic data was calculated for each transect to produce 
three  profiles  (Profile  1-3).  The  magnetic  susceptibility  data  used  published  petrophysical  data  to 
calculate the magnetic field. 
5.2.1. Profile 1 
Profile  1  is  located  in  a  low  magnetic  susceptibility  and  high  density  zone  (Figure  4.13).  The 
petrophysical data from WAXI (2013) reported that the geology along the transect line is composed of 
granite, coarse-grained sedimentary rocks, pegmatite, and granite with plagioclase and biotite. 
The  interpreted  model  of  profile  1  presents  six  bodies  (Figure  5.3).  The  parameters  of  the  six 
bodies are presented in Table 5.1. According to the parameters, the top-depth of the bodies is located 
at approximately 1000m depth and all bodies project at depth. 
According to the magnetic susceptibility and density, bodies 1, 5 and 6 are different from bodies 
2, 3 and 4, reflecting different rock types. Bodies 2, 3 and 4, which are located in the Yanfolila shear 
zone, report high susceptibility that corresponds to the low magnetic field. Bodies 1, 5 and 6 report a 
low susceptibility. 
The profile shows similarities between body 1 and 6 in terms of parameters (dip, top depth and 
depth projection)  (Table 5.1).  Bodies 2, 3, 4  and 5  with  approximately  the same  parameters  (Table 
5.1) are situated between bodies 1 and 6 (Figure 5.3) and correspond with the positon of the Yanfolila 
shear  zone  which  crosscuts  the  region.  Body  5  is  slightly  different  than  bodies  2,  3  and  4  and 
corresponds with the position of the Kalana-Kodiaran fold. Bodies 1 and 6 are located respectively to 
the west and east of the fold. (Figure 5.3)  
41

--- Page 39 ---
5.2.2. Profile 2 
Profile  2  which  transects  the  Bougouni  belt,  is  located  in  a  moderate  to  high  magnetic 
susceptibility and low density zone (Figure 4.13). The petrophysical data from WAXI (2013) reported 
that the geology along the transect line is composed of orthogranite, sediments, pegmatites and quartz 
veins. 
The interpreted model of profile 2 presents five bodies (Figure 5.4). The parameters of the five 
bodies are presented in Table 5.1. According to the parameters, the top-depth of the bodies is located 
at approximately 750m depth and all bodies project at depth. 
According to the magnetic susceptibility and density, bodies 2, 3 and 5 are different from bodies 
1 and 4, reflecting different rock types. Bodies 2, 3 and 5 report a low susceptibility corresponding to 
a  high  magnetic  field.  Bodies  1  and  4  shows  similarities  in  term  of  parameters  (dip,  top  depth  and 
depth  projection)  (Table  5.1)  and  report  a  high  magnetic  susceptibility.  The  bodies  2,  3  and  5 
correspond with the Banifing shear zone and are possibly west-dipping splay shears. Consequently the 
Banifing  shear  zone  is  interpreted  as  complex  structure.  The  high  susceptibility  and  low  density  of 
bodies 1 and 4 could indicate granitoid intrusions.  
5.2.3. Profile 3 
Profile 3 transects the Kolondieba belt, and is located in a low to moderate susceptibility and low 
density zone (Figure 4.13). The petrophysical data from WAXI (2013) reported that the geology along 
the transect line is composed feldspathic sand, gneiss and gneiss-granitoid. 
The  interpreted  model  of  profile  3  presents  six  bodies  (Figure  5.5).  The  parameters  of  the  six 
bodies are presented in Table 5.1. According to the parameters, the top-depth of the bodies is located 
at approximately 800m depth and all bodies project at depth. 
According to the magnetic susceptibility and density, bodies 1, 2 and 4 are classified as different 
from bodies 3, 5 and 6, reflecting different rock types. Bodies 2 and 4 report low susceptibility and are 
interpreted as splay shears of the Banifing shear zone. Bodies 3, 5 and 6 report a high susceptibility. 
The profile resolves similarities between bodies 3, 5 and 6 in term of parameters (dip, top depth 
and depth projection) (Table 5.1).  The bodies 2 and 4  are  similar in parameters,  and different  from 
body  1.  However,  bodies  2,  3,  4,  5,  6  are  located  in  the  Banifing  shear  zone.  Consequently,  the 
Banifing  shear  zone  can  be  considered  as  a  complex  structure  formed  by  a  main  shear  and  several 
secondary splay shears that resolve differences in dip and trend. 
5.2.4. Synthesis of forward modelling 
The forward modelling of the three transects shows that: 
1.  Transect  1  crosscuts  the  Yanfolila  shear  zone  and  resolves  its  complexity.  The  trends  are 
subvertical  to  east-dipping  for  body  3,  and  east-dipping  for  bodies  2  and  3;  they  are  interpreted  as 
42

--- Page 40 ---
splay shears to the main Yanfolila shear zone. The Yanfolila shear zone crosscuts the Yanfolila belt 
according to the similarity of bodies 1 and 6. The Kalana-Kodieran fold also is identified in transect 1. 
2.  Transect  2  and  3  is  located  to  the  Banifing  shear  zone  which  is  also  a  complex  structure 
composed of several shear trends and secondary splay shears. 
The  forward  modelling of three profiles  across the Yanfolila  and Banifing shear  zones (Figure 
4.13) facilitated the characterization and geometry of the first-order structures, in terms of trend and 
dip.  The  models  enabled  the  determination  of  magnetic  anomalies.  The  depth  of  the  anomalies  is 
greater for the Yanfolila shear zone than the Banifing shear zone. The difference of source depth is 
due to the presence of sedimentary cover rocks along transect 1 to 1100m, and 850m for transect 2 
and  3.  Importantly  the  data  shows  that  the  cover  sequences  postdate  activity  on  the  shear  zones 
suggesting that the shear zones were truncated and unconformably overlain by younger sedimentary 
cover  rocks.  The  low  magnetic  susceptibility  and  high  density  along  transect  1  is  interpreted  to  be 
related to the thickness of the sedimentary cover rocks. The higher density may be due to compaction 
effects. The rocks types are likely to be siltstone, shale and/or volcaniclastic sediments. 
5.3. Inverse modelling 
The  inversion  was  performed  on  six  (6)  key  zones  according  to  high  levels  of  confidence 
established in Table 4.1, and available fact and petrophysical data (Figure 4.17). The location of the 
key  zones  is  presented  in  Figure  ***  and  are  situated  on  the  first-order  crustal  scale  Yanfolila  and 
Banifing  shear  zones,  and  certain  second-order  structures  and  dykes  (Figure  5.6).  The  selection  of 
second-order  structures  was  based  on  proximity  to  the  first-order  crustal  scale  structures.  The 
inversions were performed using magnetic and gravity data in addition to the forward modelling of 
transects to produce a consistence model of the selected zone. The results of the inversions enabled 
the determination of the form, volume and the geometries of rock volumes and structures. The trend, 
depth, dip, and the crosscutting relationship between rock volumes and structures were calculated to 
develop an architectural model of the study area. 
5.3.1. Key zone 1 
The  inversion  model  of  key  zone  1  is  presented  in  Figure  5.6;  zone  3  is  located  *****.    The 
inversion model of key zone 1 included the Yanfolila shear zone, Kalana-Kodiaran fold, Mandiana-
Yanfolila  fault,  and  dykes.  According  to  the  magnetic  and  gravity  maps  (Figure  4.13),  the  area  is 
located in a low susceptibility, and low to high density region. 
The  inversion  of  magnetic  and  gravity  data  (Figure  5.6)  resolves  the  Yanfolila  shear  zone  and 
specific  rock  volumes  that  trend  north  and  north-northeast.  These  can  be  divided  into  two 
susceptibility  groups,  namely  (1)  a  high  susceptibility  rock  volumes,  and  (2)  moderate  to  low 
susceptibility north-northeast trending rock volumes values. 
43 
Comment [KH1]: Not correct figure 
number for gravity and magnetic maps

--- Page 41 ---
A low density rock volume in the southeastern corner of the inversion could be due granitoids in 
that region. North-northeast trend rock volumes in the magnetic data resolve high density values in 
the north and south of the inversion (Figure 5.6) that probably correspond with basalt andesite rocks. 
The Yanfolila shear zone is characterised by two parallel trends and the presence of a close upright 
symmetric  fold  in  the  south on  the inversion.  A  number of  southeast  trending  splay  shears are  also 
evident.  
Geometric elements such as dip, depth of structures and rocks volumes were determined for the 
magmatic and gravity inversion sections of zone 1 (Figures 5.7-5.8). The Yanfolila shear zone dips 
steeply  west  in  the  south  of  the  inversion,  steeply  east  in  the  centre  and  north  of  the  inversion. 
Secondary  southwest  trending  splay  shears  dip  subvertical  to  steeply  west.  The  shears  bound  high 
susceptibility  rock  volumes,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  inversion  form  a  left-handed  (anticlockwise) 
sigmoid that is consistent with sinistral displacement in the plane of the Yanfolila shear zone (Figure 
5.6). 
5.3.2. Key Zone 2 
The  inverse  model  of  key  zone  2  is  presented  in  Figure  5.9;  zone  3  is  located  ****.  Zone  2 
includes the Yanfolila shear zone; Kalana-Kodiaran fold and Madiana-Yanfolila fault. According to 
the petrophysical data, Zone 2 is composed of granite, sedimentary rocks, pegmatite and weathered 
granite. Zone 2 is characterised by low magnetic susceptibility (Figure 4.13). 
The inversion of magnetic and gravity data resolves rock volumes and structures that trend north-
northeast (Figure 5.9). According to the gravity data inversion, high density rock volumes are located 
in  the  western  region  of  the  inversion  adjacent  to  the  Yanfolila  shear  zone  (Figure  5.9).  High 
susceptibility rock volumes generally trend north-northeast across zone 2 and are bounded by shears. 
Geometric elements such as dip, depth of structures and width were determined for the magmatic 
and gravity inversion sections of zone 2 (Figures 5.10-5.11). The majority of high susceptibility rocks 
dip  steeply  to  the  east,  as  do  their  bounding  shear  zones.  The  inversion  section  of  gravity  data 
presented in Figure 5.11 resolves high densities rock volumes at depth in the region of the Yanfolila 
shear zone, but these are (apparently) not crosscut by the shear. The high density rocks could be due 
to  intrusion  at  depth  that  is  younger  than  the  Yanfolila  shear  zone.  Low  density  rocks  occur  in  the 
extreme west of zone 2, and to the east of the Yanfolila shear zone (Figure 5.11). These low density 
rocks are interpreted as unconsolidated sediment and/or deeply weathered granite. 
5.3.3. Key Zone 3 
The inversion model of key zone 3 is presented in Figure 5.12; zone 3 is located in the northwest 
of  the  study  and  includes  the  Yanfolila  fault  and  Yanfolila  belt.  The  area  is  characterised  by  low 
44

--- Page 42 ---
magnetic and high density rocks. According to published petrophysical data, the area is composed of 
felsic intrusions. 
The  inversion  model  of  magnetic  data  is  presented  in  Figure  5.12  resolves  generally  north  to 
north-northeast rock volumes. The north trending rock volume in the east of zone 3 correspond with 
the  position  of  the  Yanfolila  belt.  The  north-northeast  trending  rock  volume  in  the  west  of  zone  3 
corresponds  with  the  position  of  the  Yanfolila  fault.  The  Yanfolila  fault  is  arcuate  and  is  north 
trending  in  the  south  of  zone  3  and  north-northeast  trending  in  the  north  of  zone  3.  An  east-west 
trending dolerite dyke is clearly evident in the inversion model and corresponds with dyke 1 marked 
in  Figure  4.13;  the  dyke  crosscuts  the  Yanfolila  fault  and  Yanfolila  belt.  East-west  trending  linear 
intrusions have been mapped as dolerite dykes across the study are a (Reference) 
According to the gravity data inversion, high density rocks are located in the northwest of zone 3 
(Figure 5.14). The high density coincides with a north-northeast trending susceptibility volume. The 
coincidence may indicate basaltic rocks. 
Geometric elements such as dip, depth of structures and rocks volumes were determined for the 
magmatic  and  gravity  inversion  sections  of  zone  3  (Figures  5.13-5.14).  The  Yanfolila  fault  dips 
steeply west. 
The  parameters  of  the  east-west  trending  dyke  that  crosscuts  the  Yanfolila  fault  and  Yanfolila 
belt and the high density (basaltic) rocks in the northwest of zone 3 are presented in Figure 5.15 with 
sections. From this data it is clear that the dyke dips steeply to south in the east of zone 3, and rolls 
over  the dip steeply  north in  the  west  of Zone 3. High  susceptibilities  are  located  at  approximately 
300m depth for the dyke and at 600m depth for the basalt. Thick sedimentary cover above the dyke 
and basalt is attributed to low susceptibility values at surface.  
5.3.4. Key Zone 4 
The inversion of key zone 4 is presented in Figure 5.16. Key zone 4 is located in the southeast of 
the  study  area  on  the  Banifing  shear  zone  (Figure  4.13).  It  includes  the  Bougouni  volcanic  belt, 
Menankoro fault, and group two dykes. Zone 4 is composed of low to high magnetic susceptibility, 
and low density rocks. According to petrophysical measurement of surface rocks, the geology of the 
Comment [KH2]: Confusion. Is group 2 
number 2, or is their another way of 
grouping the dykes. 
region includes ortho-granite, sediment, ortho-gniess and pegmatite. 
The inversion of magnetic data of key zone 4 presents many rock volume and structural trends 
(Figure  5.16).  The  trends  include  northwest  to  north  trending  rock  volumes  in  the  west  of  the 
inversion,  and  northeast  trending  rock  volumes  in  the  east  of  the  inversion.  An  east-west  trending 
dyke is evident in the inversion model and corresponds  with dolerite dyke  *****  marked in Figure 
4.13. 
The  northwest  to  north  trending  rock  volumes  correspond  with  the  Bougouni  volcano-
sedimentary  belt.  Segments  of  the  northwest  trending  Menankoro  fault  crosscut  this  belt.  The 
northeast trending rock volumes in the east of the inversion are located adjacent to the Banifing shear 
45

--- Page 43 ---
Comment [KH3]: Why specifically 
volcaniclastic and not sedimentary 
zone and could also be related to granitoid as the susceptibility is high and density low, perhaps as a 
result of a high content of silica. Additionally, a high density high susceptibility zone is located in the 
northwest corner of zone 4 which could be related to gneissic rocks in the Bougouni belt.  
The inversion sections from magnetic and gravity data of zone 4 are presented in Figures 5.17-
5.18. In Figure 5.17, northwest trending rock volumes in Bougouni belt dip sub-vertically to steeply 
west, while north trending rock volumes trending dip steeply east. 
In contrast, northeast trending rock volumes in the region of the Banifing shear zone dip steeply 
east and are bound by it and secondary splay shears that trend north to north-northeasterly. According 
to  the  inversion  sections,  the  Banifing  shear  zone  is  characterised  by  low  density  and  low 
susceptibility which could be due to the volcaniclastic sediments in the region because *****. 
The parameters of the east-west trending dyke that crosscuts zone 4 are presented in Figure 5.19 
with sections. From this data the dyke dips steeply to north to vertical. Thick sedimentary cover above 
the dyke is attributed to low susceptibility values at surface. 
5.3.5. Key Zone 5 
The inversion of key zone 5 is presented in Figure 5.20. Key zone 5 is located in the central east 
of the study area on the widest part of the Banifing shear zone and includes the Madina fault and the 
southern  extension  of  the  Kolondieba  belt  (Figure  4.13).  According  to  the  petrophysical 
measurements  of  surface  rocks  (WAXI,  2013)  lithologies  include  granitoid  gneiss,  various 
metasedimentary  rocks,  feldspathic  sand,  and pegmatite  veins.  The  low  susceptibility  of  the  zone 5 
model is related to sedimentary cover.  
The  zone  5  is  composed  of  low  to  high  susceptibility  and  the  low  density  volumes,  that  trend 
north to northeast. Some rock volumes are arcuate in shape (Figure 5.20). 
Northeasterly and north-northeasterly trending rocks volumes dominate the centre and east of the 
zone 5 model and correspond to high magnetic susceptibility values in and adjacent to the Banifing 
shear zone (Figure 5.20). The overall shear trend can be defined as northeasterly but internal north-
northeast  trending  rock  volumes  form  right-handed  (clockwise)  sigmoids  that  are  consistent  with 
dextral displacement in the plane of the Banifing shear zone 
Northerly trending rocks volumes occur in the Kolondieba belt in the west of zone 5, and in the 
east and are arcuate in form. This may suggest folding of the rock units they represent.  
Two areas of high densities are resolved in the zone 5 inversion model (Figure 5.20). Area 1 is 
located  in  the  Kolondieba  belt,  where  the  high  density  coincides  to  the  high  susceptibility.  The 
coincidence of high susceptibility and high density corresponds to gneissic rocks identified with the 
surface  rock  petrophysics  measurements.  Area  2  is  located  in  the  Banifing  shear  zone  and  is  also 
interpreted as a gneissic rock volume. 
46

--- Page 44 ---
The magnetic and gravity inversion sections of model 5 are presented in Figures 5.21-5.22. The 
inversion  sections demonstrate that  the Banifing  shear  zone is steeply  dipping to  the  west  and  east. 
According to the magnetic section, the rock volumes are located at approximately 500-700m depth. 
According to gravity sections (Figure 5.22), high density rocks are located in the northern part of 
model  5  at  depth;  they  are  not  crosscut  by  the  Banifing  shear  zone  and  may  represent  younger 
intrusions. A high density region in the northwest of zone 5 in the Kolondieba belt could be due to the 
basalt and gneiss.  
5.3.6. Key Zone 6 
Magnetic and gravity inversion of key zone 6 are presented in Figure 5.23. The zone 6 is located 
in  the  northern  part  of  Banifing  shear  zone  in  the  northeast  of  the  study  area.  Zone  6  includes  the 
Madina  fault  and  Koumantou-Morila  fault  (Figure  4.13).  The  geology  includes  andesite  and  highly 
metamorphosed  sediment  with  biotite  and  muscovite  according  to  the  surface  petrophysical 
measurements. Zone 6 is characterized by low, moderate and high susceptibility. The density values 
of zone 6 vary from low to moderate. 
In the magnetic data inversion for key zone 6, north to north-northeast trending rock volumes are 
readily identified. They correspond to the high susceptibility values of the rocks. In the north of zone 
6,  high  susceptibility  values  coincide  with  high  density  values  and  could  indicate  the  presence  of 
andesite in that region. 
The magnetic and gravity inversion sections of model 5 are presented in Figures 5.24-5.25. The 
inversion sections demonstrate that north trending rock volume dip steeply east, while north-northeast 
trending rock volume dip steeply west. 
5.3.7. Geological synthesis of inverse modelling  
Inverse modelling was performed on the two first-order crustal-scale structures, namely, the 
Yanfolila shear zone and Banifing shear zone. The inversions modelling resolved the geometry of the 
shear zone geometries using the surface petrophysical and fact data available. The inversion showed:-  
1.  There is a difference in thicknesses of sedimentary cover at approximately 1200m for the 
Yanfolila shear zone and approximately 700m for Banifing shear zone. 
2.  First-order scale shear zones are steeply dipping to the west or east and are complex 
structures, with numerous second order splay shear. 
3.  The  Yanfolila  shear  zone  is  characterised  by  parallel  shear  trends.  A  number  of  southwest 
trending second order splay shears are also evident. The shears bound high susceptibility rock 
volumes that internal to the Yanfolila shear zone form left-handed (anticlockwise) sigmoids 
that are consistent with sinistral displacement in the plane of the shear zone. The high density 
rocks at depth could be intrusions that are younger than the Yanfolila shear zone.  
47

--- Page 45 ---
4.  The Yanfolila fault to the west of the Yanfolila belt is arcuate and dips steeply west. 
5.  The Banifing shear zone is also characterised by parallel shear trends. A number of southeast 
trending splay shears are also evident. The shears bound high susceptibility rock volumes that 
internal to the Banifing shear zone form right handed (clockwise) sigmoids that are consistent 
with dextral displacement in the plane of the shear zone, respectively.  
6.  It  is  possible  to  resolve  the  geometry  of  dolerite  dykes  and  establish  their  crosscutting 
relationship. Thick sedimentary cover above dykes is attributed to low susceptibility values at 
surface. 
48
